dramatis personae

     torvald helmer.
     nora, his wife.
     doctor rank.
     mrs. linde.
     nils krogstad.
     helmer's three young children.
     anne, their nurse.
     a housemaid.
     a porter.
     (the action takes place in helmer's house.)

     a doll's house




act i

(scene.--a room furnished comfortably and tastefully, but not
extravagantly. at the back, a door to the right leads to the
entrance-hall, another to the left leads to helmer's study. between the
doors stands a piano. in the middle of the left-hand wall is a door, and
beyond it a window. near the window are a round table, arm-chairs and
a small sofa. in the right-hand wall, at the farther end, another door;
and on the same side, nearer the footlights, a stove, two easy chairs
and a rocking-chair; between the stove and the door, a small table.
engravings on the walls; a cabinet with china and other small objects;
a small book-case with well-bound books. the floors are carpeted, and a
fire burns in the stove. it is winter.

a bell rings in the hall; shortly afterwards the door is heard to open.
enter nora, humming a tune and in high spirits. she is in outdoor dress
and carries a number of parcels; these she lays on the table to the
right. she leaves the outer door open after her, and through it is seen
a porter who is carrying a christmas tree and a basket, which he gives
to the maid who has opened the door.)

nora. hide the christmas tree carefully, helen. be sure the children
do not see it until this evening, when it is dressed. (to the porter,
taking out her purse.) how much?

porter. sixpence.

nora. there is a shilling. no, keep the change. (the porter thanks her,
and goes out. nora shuts the door. she is laughing to herself, as she
takes off her hat and coat. she takes a packet of macaroons from her
pocket and eats one or two; then goes cautiously to her husband's door
and listens.) yes, he is in. (still humming, she goes to the table on
the right.)

helmer (calls out from his room). is that my little lark twittering out
there?

nora (busy opening some of the parcels). yes, it is!

helmer. is it my little squirrel bustling about?

nora. yes!

helmer. when did my squirrel come home?

nora. just now. (puts the bag of macaroons into her pocket and wipes her
mouth.) come in here, torvald, and see what i have bought.

helmer. don't disturb me. (a little later, he opens the door and looks
into the room, pen in hand.) bought, did you say? all these things? has
my little spendthrift been wasting money again?

nora. yes but, torvald, this year we really can let ourselves go
a little. this is the first christmas that we have not needed to
economise.

helmer. still, you know, we can't spend money recklessly. nora. yes,
torvald, we may be a wee bit more reckless now, mayn't we? just a tiny
wee bit! you are going to have a big salary and earn lots and lots of
money.

helmer. yes, after the new year; but then it will be a whole quarter
before the salary is due.

nora. pooh! we can borrow until then.

helmer. nora! (goes up to her and takes her playfully by the ear.) the
same little featherhead! suppose, now, that i borrowed fifty pounds
today, and you spent it all in the christmas week, and then on new
year's eve a slate fell on my head and killed me, and--nora (putting her
hands over his mouth). oh! don't say such horrid things.

helmer. still, suppose that happened,--what then?

nora. if that were to happen, i don't suppose i should care whether i
owed money or not.

helmer. yes, but what about the people who had lent it?

nora. they? who would bother about them? i should not know who they
were.

helmer. that is like a woman! but seriously, nora, you know what i think
about that. no debt, no borrowing. there can be no freedom or beauty
about a home life that depends on borrowing and debt. we two have kept
bravely on the straight road so far, and we will go on the same way for
the short time longer that there need be any struggle.

nora (moving towards the stove). as you please, torvald.

helmer (following her). come, come, my little skylark must not droop her
wings. what is this! is my little squirrel out of temper? (taking out
his purse.) nora, what do you think i have got here?

nora (turning round quickly). money!

helmer. there you are. (gives her some money.) do you think i don't know
what a lot is wanted for housekeeping at christmas-time?

nora (counting). ten shillings--a pound--two pounds! thank you, thank
you, torvald; that will keep me going for a long time.

helmer. indeed it must.

nora. yes, yes, it will. but come here and let me show you what i have
bought. and all so cheap! look, here is a new suit for ivar, and
a sword; and a horse and a trumpet for bob; and a doll and dolly's
bedstead for emmy,--they are very plain, but anyway she will soon break
them in pieces. and here are dress-lengths and handkerchiefs for the
maids; old anne ought really to have something better.

helmer. and what is in this parcel?

nora (crying out). no, no! you mustn't see that until this evening.

helmer. very well. but now tell me, you extravagant little person, what
would you like for yourself?

nora. for myself? oh, i am sure i don't want anything.

helmer. yes, but you must. tell me something reasonable that you would
particularly like to have.

nora. no, i really can't think of anything--unless, torvald--

helmer. well?

nora (playing with his coat buttons, and without raising her eyes to
his). if you really want to give me something, you might--you might--

helmer. well, out with it!

nora (speaking quickly). you might give me money, torvald. only just as
much as you can afford; and then one of these days i will buy something
with it.

helmer. but, nora--

nora. oh, do! dear torvald; please, please do! then i will wrap it up in
beautiful gilt paper and hang it on the christmas tree. wouldn't that be
fun?

helmer. what are little people called that are always wasting money?

nora. spendthrifts--i know. let us do as you suggest, torvald, and then
i shall have time to think what i am most in want of. that is a very
sensible plan, isn't it?

helmer (smiling). indeed it is--that is to say, if you were really to
save out of the money i give you, and then really buy something for
yourself. but if you spend it all on the housekeeping and any number of
unnecessary things, then i merely have to pay up again.

nora. oh but, torvald--

helmer. you can't deny it, my dear little nora. (puts his arm round
her waist.) it's a sweet little spendthrift, but she uses up a deal of
money. one would hardly believe how expensive such little persons are!

nora. it's a shame to say that. i do really save all i can.

helmer (laughing). that's very true,--all you can. but you can't save
anything!

nora (smiling quietly and happily). you haven't any idea how many
expenses we skylarks and squirrels have, torvald.

helmer. you are an odd little soul. very like your father. you always
find some new way of wheedling money out of me, and, as soon as you
have got it, it seems to melt in your hands. you never know where it
has gone. still, one must take you as you are. it is in the blood; for
indeed it is true that you can inherit these things, nora.

nora. ah, i wish i had inherited many of papa's qualities.

helmer. and i would not wish you to be anything but just what you are,
my sweet little skylark. but, do you know, it strikes me that you are
looking rather--what shall i say--rather uneasy today?

nora. do i?

helmer. you do, really. look straight at me.

nora (looks at him). well?

helmer (wagging his finger at her). hasn't miss sweet tooth been
breaking rules in town today?

nora. no; what makes you think that?

helmer. hasn't she paid a visit to the confectioner's?

nora. no, i assure you, torvald--

helmer. not been nibbling sweets?

nora. no, certainly not.

helmer. not even taken a bite at a macaroon or two?

nora. no, torvald, i assure you really--

helmer. there, there, of course i was only joking.

nora (going to the table on the right). i should not think of going
against your wishes.

helmer. no, i am sure of that; besides, you gave me your word-- (going
up to her.) keep your little christmas secrets to yourself, my darling.
they will all be revealed tonight when the christmas tree is lit, no
doubt.

nora. did you remember to invite doctor rank?

helmer. no. but there is no need; as a matter of course he will come to
dinner with us. however, i will ask him when he comes in this morning.
i have ordered some good wine. nora, you can't think how i am looking
forward to this evening.

nora. so am i! and how the children will enjoy themselves, torvald!

helmer. it is splendid to feel that one has a perfectly safe
appointment, and a big enough income. it's delightful to think of, isn't
it?

nora. it's wonderful!

helmer. do you remember last christmas? for a full three weeks
beforehand you shut yourself up every evening until long after midnight,
making ornaments for the christmas tree, and all the other fine things
that were to be a surprise to us. it was the dullest three weeks i ever
spent!

nora. i didn't find it dull.

helmer (smiling). but there was precious little result, nora.

nora. oh, you shouldn't tease me about that again. how could i help the
cat's going in and tearing everything to pieces?

helmer. of course you couldn't, poor little girl. you had the best of
intentions to please us all, and that's the main thing. but it is a good
thing that our hard times are over.

nora. yes, it is really wonderful.

helmer. this time i needn't sit here and be dull all alone, and you
needn't ruin your dear eyes and your pretty little hands--

nora (clapping her hands). no, torvald, i needn't any longer, need i!
it's wonderfully lovely to hear you say so! (taking his arm.) now i will
tell you how i have been thinking we ought to arrange things, torvald.
as soon as christmas is over--(a bell rings in the hall.) there's the
bell. (she tidies the room a little.) there's some one at the door. what
a nuisance!

helmer. if it is a caller, remember i am not at home.

maid (in the doorway). a lady to see you, ma'am,--a stranger.

nora. ask her to come in.

maid (to helmer). the doctor came at the same time, sir.

helmer. did he go straight into my room?

maid. yes, sir.

(helmer goes into his room. the maid ushers in mrs. linde, who is in
travelling dress, and shuts the door.) mrs. linde (in a dejected and
timid voice). how do you do, nora?

nora (doubtfully). how do you do--mrs. linde. you don't recognise me, i
suppose.

nora. no, i don't know--yes, to be sure, i seem to--(suddenly.) yes!
christine! is it really you?

mrs. linde. yes, it is i.

nora. christine! to think of my not recognising you! and yet how could
i--(in a gentle voice.) how you have altered, christine!

mrs. linde. yes, i have indeed. in nine, ten long years--

nora. is it so long since we met? i suppose it is. the last eight years
have been a happy time for me, i can tell you. and so now you have come
into the town, and have taken this long journey in winter--that was
plucky of you.

mrs. linde. i arrived by steamer this morning.

nora. to have some fun at christmas-time, of course. how delightful! we
will have such fun together! but take off your things. you are not cold,
i hope. (helps her.) now we will sit down by the stove, and be cosy.
no, take this armchair; i will sit here in the rocking-chair. (takes
her hands.) now you look like your old self again; it was only the first
moment--you are a little paler, christine, and perhaps a little thinner.

mrs. linde. and much, much older, nora.

nora. perhaps a little older; very, very little; certainly not much.
(stops suddenly and speaks seriously.) what a thoughtless creature i am,
chattering away like this. my poor, dear christine, do forgive me.

mrs. linde. what do you mean, nora?

nora (gently). poor christine, you are a widow.

mrs. linde. yes; it is three years ago now.

nora. yes, i knew; i saw it in the papers. i assure you, christine, i
meant ever so often to write to you at the time, but i always put it off
and something always prevented me.

mrs. linde. i quite understand, dear.

nora. it was very bad of me, christine. poor thing, how you must have
suffered. and he left you nothing?

mrs. linde. no.

nora. and no children?

mrs. linde. no.

nora. nothing at all, then.

mrs. linde. not even any sorrow or grief to live upon.

nora (looking incredulously at her). but, christine, is that possible?

mrs. linde (smiles sadly and strokes her hair). it sometimes happens,
nora.

nora. so you are quite alone. how dreadfully sad that must be. i have
three lovely children. you can't see them just now, for they are out
with their nurse. but now you must tell me all about it.

mrs. linde. no, no; i want to hear about you.

nora. no, you must begin. i mustn't be selfish today; today i must only
think of your affairs. but there is one thing i must tell you. do you
know we have just had a great piece of good luck?

mrs. linde. no, what is it?

nora. just fancy, my husband has been made manager of the bank!

mrs. linde. your husband? what good luck!

nora. yes, tremendous! a barrister's profession is such an uncertain
thing, especially if he won't undertake unsavoury cases; and naturally
torvald has never been willing to do that, and i quite agree with him.
you may imagine how pleased we are! he is to take up his work in the
bank at the new year, and then he will have a big salary and lots of
commissions. for the future we can live quite differently--we can do
just as we like. i feel so relieved and so happy, christine! it will be
splendid to have heaps of money and not need to have any anxiety, won't
it?

mrs. linde. yes, anyhow i think it would be delightful to have what one
needs.

nora. no, not only what one needs, but heaps and heaps of money.

mrs. linde (smiling). nora, nora, haven't you learned sense yet? in our
schooldays you were a great spendthrift.

nora (laughing). yes, that is what torvald says now. (wags her finger at
her.) but "nora, nora" is not so silly as you think. we have not been in
a position for me to waste money. we have both had to work.

mrs. linde. you too?

nora. yes; odds and ends, needlework, crotchet-work, embroidery, and
that kind of thing. (dropping her voice.) and other things as well. you
know torvald left his office when we were married? there was no prospect
of promotion there, and he had to try and earn more than before. but
during the first year he over-worked himself dreadfully. you see, he had
to make money every way he could, and he worked early and late; but he
couldn't stand it, and fell dreadfully ill, and the doctors said it was
necessary for him to go south.

mrs. linde. you spent a whole year in italy, didn't you?

nora. yes. it was no easy matter to get away, i can tell you. it
was just after ivar was born; but naturally we had to go. it was a
wonderfully beautiful journey, and it saved torvald's life. but it cost
a tremendous lot of money, christine.

mrs. linde. so i should think.

nora. it cost about two hundred and fifty pounds. that's a lot, isn't
it?

mrs. linde. yes, and in emergencies like that it is lucky to have the
money.

nora. i ought to tell you that we had it from papa.

mrs. linde. oh, i see. it was just about that time that he died, wasn't
it?

nora. yes; and, just think of it, i couldn't go and nurse him. i was
expecting little ivar's birth every day and i had my poor sick torvald
to look after. my dear, kind father--i never saw him again, christine.
that was the saddest time i have known since our marriage.

mrs. linde. i know how fond you were of him. and then you went off to
italy?

nora. yes; you see we had money then, and the doctors insisted on our
going, so we started a month later.

mrs. linde. and your husband came back quite well?

nora. as sound as a bell!

mrs. linde. but--the doctor?

nora. what doctor?

mrs. linde. i thought your maid said the gentleman who arrived here just
as i did, was the doctor?

nora. yes, that was doctor rank, but he doesn't come here
professionally. he is our greatest friend, and comes in at least once
every day. no, torvald has not had an hour's illness since then, and our
children are strong and healthy and so am i. (jumps up and claps her
hands.) christine! christine! it's good to be alive and happy!--but how
horrid of me; i am talking of nothing but my own affairs. (sits on a
stool near her, and rests her arms on her knees.) you mustn't be angry
with me. tell me, is it really true that you did not love your husband?
why did you marry him?

mrs. linde. my mother was alive then, and was bedridden and helpless,
and i had to provide for my two younger brothers; so i did not think i
was justified in refusing his offer.

nora. no, perhaps you were quite right. he was rich at that time, then?

mrs. linde. i believe he was quite well off. but his business was a
precarious one; and, when he died, it all went to pieces and there was
nothing left.

nora. and then?--

mrs. linde. well, i had to turn my hand to anything i could find--first
a small shop, then a small school, and so on. the last three years have
seemed like one long working-day, with no rest. now it is at an end,
nora. my poor mother needs me no more, for she is gone; and the boys
do not need me either; they have got situations and can shift for
themselves.

nora. what a relief you must feel if--

mrs. linde. no, indeed; i only feel my life unspeakably empty. no one to
live for anymore. (gets up restlessly.) that was why i could not stand
the life in my little backwater any longer. i hope it may be easier here
to find something which will busy me and occupy my thoughts. if only i
could have the good luck to get some regular work--office work of some
kind--

nora. but, christine, that is so frightfully tiring, and you look tired
out now. you had far better go away to some watering-place.

mrs. linde (walking to the window). i have no father to give me money
for a journey, nora.

nora (rising). oh, don't be angry with me!

mrs. linde (going up to her). it is you that must not be angry with me,
dear. the worst of a position like mine is that it makes one so bitter.
no one to work for, and yet obliged to be always on the lookout for
chances. one must live, and so one becomes selfish. when you told me of
the happy turn your fortunes have taken--you will hardly believe it--i
was delighted not so much on your account as on my own.

nora. how do you mean?--oh, i understand. you mean that perhaps torvald
could get you something to do.

mrs. linde. yes, that was what i was thinking of.

nora. he must, christine. just leave it to me; i will broach the subject
very cleverly--i will think of something that will please him very much.
it will make me so happy to be of some use to you.

mrs. linde. how kind you are, nora, to be so anxious to help me! it is
doubly kind in you, for you know so little of the burdens and troubles
of life.

nora. i--? i know so little of them?

mrs. linde (smiling). my dear! small household cares and that sort of
thing!--you are a child, nora.

nora (tosses her head and crosses the stage). you ought not to be so
superior.

mrs. linde. no?

nora. you are just like the others. they all think that i am incapable
of anything really serious--

mrs. linde. come, come--

nora.--that i have gone through nothing in this world of cares.

mrs. linde. but, my dear nora, you have just told me all your troubles.

nora. pooh!--those were trifles. (lowering her voice.) i have not told
you the important thing.

mrs. linde. the important thing? what do you mean?

nora. you look down upon me altogether, christine--but you ought not to.
you are proud, aren't you, of having worked so hard and so long for your
mother?

mrs. linde. indeed, i don't look down on anyone. but it is true that i
am both proud and glad to think that i was privileged to make the end of
my mother's life almost free from care.

nora. and you are proud to think of what you have done for your
brothers?

mrs. linde. i think i have the right to be.

nora. i think so, too. but now, listen to this; i too have something to
be proud and glad of.

mrs. linde. i have no doubt you have. but what do you refer to?

nora. speak low. suppose torvald were to hear! he mustn't on any
account--no one in the world must know, christine, except you.

mrs. linde. but what is it?

nora. come here. (pulls her down on the sofa beside her.) now i will
show you that i too have something to be proud and glad of. it was i who
saved torvald's life.

mrs. linde. "saved"? how?

nora. i told you about our trip to italy. torvald would never have
recovered if he had not gone there--

mrs. linde. yes, but your father gave you the necessary funds.

nora (smiling). yes, that is what torvald and all the others think,
but--

mrs. linde. but--

nora. papa didn't give us a shilling. it was i who procured the money.

mrs. linde. you? all that large sum?

nora. two hundred and fifty pounds. what do you think of that?

mrs. linde. but, nora, how could you possibly do it? did you win a prize
in the lottery?

nora (contemptuously). in the lottery? there would have been no credit
in that.

mrs. linde. but where did you get it from, then? nora (humming and
smiling with an air of mystery). hm, hm! aha!

mrs. linde. because you couldn't have borrowed it.

nora. couldn't i? why not?

mrs. linde. no, a wife cannot borrow without her husband's consent.

nora (tossing her head). oh, if it is a wife who has any head for
business--a wife who has the wit to be a little bit clever--

mrs. linde. i don't understand it at all, nora.

nora. there is no need you should. i never said i had borrowed the
money. i may have got it some other way. (lies back on the sofa.)
perhaps i got it from some other admirer. when anyone is as attractive
as i am--

mrs. linde. you are a mad creature.

nora. now, you know you're full of curiosity, christine.

mrs. linde. listen to me, nora dear. haven't you been a little bit
imprudent?

nora (sits up straight). is it imprudent to save your husband's life?

mrs. linde. it seems to me imprudent, without his knowledge, to--

nora. but it was absolutely necessary that he should not know! my
goodness, can't you understand that? it was necessary he should have no
idea what a dangerous condition he was in. it was to me that the doctors
came and said that his life was in danger, and that the only thing to
save him was to live in the south. do you suppose i didn't try, first of
all, to get what i wanted as if it were for myself? i told him how much
i should love to travel abroad like other young wives; i tried tears and
entreaties with him; i told him that he ought to remember the condition
i was in, and that he ought to be kind and indulgent to me; i even
hinted that he might raise a loan. that nearly made him angry,
christine. he said i was thoughtless, and that it was his duty as my
husband not to indulge me in my whims and caprices--as i believe he
called them. very well, i thought, you must be saved--and that was how i
came to devise a way out of the difficulty--

mrs. linde. and did your husband never get to know from your father that
the money had not come from him?

nora. no, never. papa died just at that time. i had meant to let him
into the secret and beg him never to reveal it. but he was so ill
then--alas, there never was any need to tell him.

mrs. linde. and since then have you never told your secret to your
husband?

nora. good heavens, no! how could you think so? a man who has such
strong opinions about these things! and besides, how painful and
humiliating it would be for torvald, with his manly independence, to
know that he owed me anything! it would upset our mutual relations
altogether; our beautiful happy home would no longer be what it is now.

mrs. linde. do you mean never to tell him about it?

nora (meditatively, and with a half smile). yes--someday, perhaps, after
many years, when i am no longer as nice-looking as i am now. don't laugh
at me! i mean, of course, when torvald is no longer as devoted to me as
he is now; when my dancing and dressing-up and reciting have palled on
him; then it may be a good thing to have something in reserve--(breaking
off.) what nonsense! that time will never come. now, what do you think
of my great secret, christine? do you still think i am of no use? i can
tell you, too, that this affair has caused me a lot of worry. it has
been by no means easy for me to meet my engagements punctually. i may
tell you that there is something that is called, in business, quarterly
interest, and another thing called payment in installments, and it is
always so dreadfully difficult to manage them. i have had to save a
little here and there, where i could, you understand. i have not been
able to put aside much from my housekeeping money, for torvald must have
a good table. i couldn't let my children be shabbily dressed; i have
felt obliged to use up all he gave me for them, the sweet little
darlings!

mrs. linde. so it has all had to come out of your own necessaries of
life, poor nora?

nora. of course. besides, i was the one responsible for it. whenever
torvald has given me money for new dresses and such things, i have
never spent more than half of it; i have always bought the simplest
and cheapest things. thank heaven, any clothes look well on me, and
so torvald has never noticed it. but it was often very hard on me,
christine--because it is delightful to be really well dressed, isn't it?

mrs. linde. quite so.

nora. well, then i have found other ways of earning money. last winter
i was lucky enough to get a lot of copying to do; so i locked myself up
and sat writing every evening until quite late at night. many a time i
was desperately tired; but all the same it was a tremendous pleasure to
sit there working and earning money. it was like being a man.

mrs. linde. how much have you been able to pay off in that way?

nora. i can't tell you exactly. you see, it is very difficult to keep an
account of a business matter of that kind. i only know that i have paid
every penny that i could scrape together. many a time i was at my wits'
end. (smiles.) then i used to sit here and imagine that a rich old
gentleman had fallen in love with me--

mrs. linde. what! who was it?

nora. be quiet!--that he had died; and that when his will was opened
it contained, written in big letters, the instruction: "the lovely mrs.
nora helmer is to have all i possess paid over to her at once in cash."

mrs. linde. but, my dear nora--who could the man be?

nora. good gracious, can't you understand? there was no old gentleman at
all; it was only something that i used to sit here and imagine, when i
couldn't think of any way of procuring money. but it's all the same now;
the tiresome old person can stay where he is, as far as i am concerned;
i don't care about him or his will either, for i am free from care now.
(jumps up.) my goodness, it's delightful to think of, christine! free
from care! to be able to be free from care, quite free from care; to be
able to play and romp with the children; to be able to keep the house
beautifully and have everything just as torvald likes it! and, think of
it, soon the spring will come and the big blue sky! perhaps we shall be
able to take a little trip--perhaps i shall see the sea again! oh, it's
a wonderful thing to be alive and be happy. (a bell is heard in the
hall.)

mrs. linde (rising). there is the bell; perhaps i had better go.

nora. no, don't go; no one will come in here; it is sure to be for
torvald.

servant (at the hall door). excuse me, ma'am--there is a gentleman to
see the master, and as the doctor is with him--

nora. who is it?

krogstad (at the door). it is i, mrs. helmer. (mrs. linde starts,
trembles, and turns to the window.)

nora (takes a step towards him, and speaks in a strained, low voice).
you? what is it? what do you want to see my husband about?

krogstad. bank business--in a way. i have a small post in the bank, and
i hear your husband is to be our chief now--

nora. then it is--

krogstad. nothing but dry business matters, mrs. helmer; absolutely
nothing else.

nora. be so good as to go into the study, then. (she bows indifferently
to him and shuts the door into the hall; then comes back and makes up
the fire in the stove.)

mrs. linde. nora--who was that man?

nora. a lawyer, of the name of krogstad.

mrs. linde. then it really was he.

nora. do you know the man?

mrs. linde. i used to--many years ago. at one time he was a solicitor's
clerk in our town.

nora. yes, he was.

mrs. linde. he is greatly altered.

nora. he made a very unhappy marriage.

mrs. linde. he is a widower now, isn't he?

nora. with several children. there now, it is burning up. (shuts the
door of the stove and moves the rocking-chair aside.)

mrs. linde. they say he carries on various kinds of business.

nora. really! perhaps he does; i don't know anything about it. but don't
let us think of business; it is so tiresome.

doctor rank (comes out of helmer's study. before he shuts the door he
calls to him). no, my dear fellow, i won't disturb you; i would rather
go in to your wife for a little while. (shuts the door and sees mrs.
linde.) i beg your pardon; i am afraid i am disturbing you too.

nora. no, not at all. (introducing him). doctor rank, mrs. linde.

rank. i have often heard mrs. linde's name mentioned here. i think i
passed you on the stairs when i arrived, mrs. linde?

mrs. linde. yes, i go up very slowly; i can't manage stairs well.

rank. ah! some slight internal weakness?

mrs. linde. no, the fact is i have been overworking myself.

rank. nothing more than that? then i suppose you have come to town to
amuse yourself with our entertainments?

mrs. linde. i have come to look for work.

rank. is that a good cure for overwork?

mrs. linde. one must live, doctor rank.

rank. yes, the general opinion seems to be that it is necessary.

nora. look here, doctor rank--you know you want to live.

rank. certainly. however wretched i may feel, i want to prolong the
agony as long as possible. all my patients are like that. and so are
those who are morally diseased; one of them, and a bad case too, is at
this very moment with helmer--

mrs. linde (sadly). ah!

nora. whom do you mean?

rank. a lawyer of the name of krogstad, a fellow you don't know at all.
he suffers from a diseased moral character, mrs. helmer; but even he
began talking of its being highly important that he should live.

nora. did he? what did he want to speak to torvald about?

rank. i have no idea; i only heard that it was something about the bank.

nora. i didn't know this--what's his name--krogstad had anything to do
with the bank.

rank. yes, he has some sort of appointment there. (to mrs. linde.) i
don't know whether you find also in your part of the world that there
are certain people who go zealously snuffing about to smell out moral
corruption, and, as soon as they have found some, put the person
concerned into some lucrative position where they can keep their eye on
him. healthy natures are left out in the cold.

mrs. linde. still i think the sick are those who most need taking care
of.

rank (shrugging his shoulders). yes, there you are. that is the
sentiment that is turning society into a sick-house.

(nora, who has been absorbed in her thoughts, breaks out into smothered
laughter and claps her hands.)

rank. why do you laugh at that? have you any notion what society really
is?

nora. what do i care about tiresome society? i am laughing at something
quite different, something extremely amusing. tell me, doctor rank, are
all the people who are employed in the bank dependent on torvald now?

rank. is that what you find so extremely amusing?

nora (smiling and humming). that's my affair! (walking about the room.)
it's perfectly glorious to think that we have--that torvald has so much
power over so many people. (takes the packet from her pocket.) doctor
rank, what do you say to a macaroon?

rank. what, macaroons? i thought they were forbidden here.

nora. yes, but these are some christine gave me.

mrs. linde. what! i?--

nora. oh, well, don't be alarmed! you couldn't know that torvald had
forbidden them. i must tell you that he is afraid they will spoil my
teeth. but, bah!--once in a way--that's so, isn't it, doctor rank? by
your leave! (puts a macaroon into his mouth.) you must have one too,
christine. and i shall have one, just a little one--or at most two.
(walking about.) i am tremendously happy. there is just one thing in the
world now that i should dearly love to do.

rank. well, what is that?

nora. it's something i should dearly love to say, if torvald could hear
me.

rank. well, why can't you say it?

nora. no, i daren't; it's so shocking.

mrs. linde. shocking?

rank. well, i should not advise you to say it. still, with us you might.
what is it you would so much like to say if torvald could hear you?

nora. i should just love to say--well, i'm damned!

rank. are you mad?

mrs. linde. nora, dear--!

rank. say it, here he is!

nora (hiding the packet). hush! hush! hush! (helmer comes out of his
room, with his coat over his arm and his hat in his hand.)

nora. well, torvald dear, have you got rid of him?

helmer. yes, he has just gone.

nora. let me introduce you--this is christine, who has come to town.

helmer. christine--? excuse me, but i don't know--

nora. mrs. linde, dear; christine linde.

helmer. of course. a school friend of my wife's, i presume?

mrs. linde. yes, we have known each other since then.

nora. and just think, she has taken a long journey in order to see you.

helmer. what do you mean? mrs. linde. no, really, i--

nora. christine is tremendously clever at book-keeping, and she is
frightfully anxious to work under some clever man, so as to perfect
herself--

helmer. very sensible, mrs. linde.

nora. and when she heard you had been appointed manager of the bank--the
news was telegraphed, you know--she travelled here as quick as
she could. torvald, i am sure you will be able to do something for
christine, for my sake, won't you?

helmer. well, it is not altogether impossible. i presume you are a
widow, mrs. linde?

mrs. linde. yes.

helmer. and have had some experience of book-keeping?

mrs. linde. yes, a fair amount.

helmer. ah! well, it's very likely i may be able to find something for
you--

nora (clapping her hands). what did i tell you? what did i tell you?

helmer. you have just come at a fortunate moment, mrs. linde.

mrs. linde. how am i to thank you?

helmer. there is no need. (puts on his coat.) but today you must excuse
me--

rank. wait a minute; i will come with you. (brings his fur coat from the
hall and warms it at the fire.)

nora. don't be long away, torvald dear.

helmer. about an hour, not more.

nora. are you going too, christine?

mrs. linde (putting on her cloak). yes, i must go and look for a room.

helmer. oh, well then, we can walk down the street together.

nora (helping her). what a pity it is we are so short of space here; i
am afraid it is impossible for us--

mrs. linde. please don't think of it! goodbye, nora dear, and many
thanks.

nora. goodbye for the present. of course you will come back this
evening. and you too, dr. rank. what do you say? if you are well enough?
oh, you must be! wrap yourself up well. (they go to the door all talking
together. children's voices are heard on the staircase.)

nora. there they are! there they are! (she runs to open the door. the
nurse comes in with the children.) come in! come in! (stoops and kisses
them.) oh, you sweet blessings! look at them, christine! aren't they
darlings?

rank. don't let us stand here in the draught.

helmer. come along, mrs. linde; the place will only be bearable for a
mother now!

(rank, helmer, and mrs. linde go downstairs. the nurse comes forward
with the children; nora shuts the hall door.)

nora. how fresh and well you look! such red cheeks like apples and
roses. (the children all talk at once while she speaks to them.) have
you had great fun? that's splendid! what, you pulled both emmy and bob
along on the sledge?--both at once?--that was good. you are a clever
boy, ivar. let me take her for a little, anne. my sweet little baby
doll! (takes the baby from the maid and dances it up and down.) yes,
yes, mother will dance with bob too. what! have you been snowballing? i
wish i had been there too! no, no, i will take their things off, anne;
please let me do it, it is such fun. go in now, you look half frozen.
there is some hot coffee for you on the stove.

(the nurse goes into the room on the left. nora takes off the children's
things and throws them about, while they all talk to her at once.)

nora. really! did a big dog run after you? but it didn't bite you? no,
dogs don't bite nice little dolly children. you mustn't look at the
parcels, ivar. what are they? ah, i daresay you would like to know. no,
no--it's something nasty! come, let us have a game! what shall we play
at? hide and seek? yes, we'll play hide and seek. bob shall hide first.
must i hide? very well, i'll hide first. (she and the children laugh
and shout, and romp in and out of the room; at last nora hides under the
table, the children rush in and out for her, but do not see her; they
hear her smothered laughter, run to the table, lift up the cloth
and find her. shouts of laughter. she crawls forward and pretends to
frighten them. fresh laughter. meanwhile there has been a knock at the
hall door, but none of them has noticed it. the door is half opened, and
krogstad appears, he waits a little; the game goes on.)

krogstad. excuse me, mrs. helmer.

nora (with a stifled cry, turns round and gets up on to her knees). ah!
what do you want?

krogstad. excuse me, the outer door was ajar; i suppose someone forgot
to shut it.

nora (rising). my husband is out, mr. krogstad.

krogstad. i know that.

nora. what do you want here, then?

krogstad. a word with you.

nora. with me?--(to the children, gently.) go in to nurse. what? no,
the strange man won't do mother any harm. when he has gone we will have
another game. (she takes the children into the room on the left, and
shuts the door after them.) you want to speak to me?

krogstad. yes, i do.

nora. today? it is not the first of the month yet.

krogstad. no, it is christmas eve, and it will depend on yourself what
sort of a christmas you will spend.

nora. what do you mean? today it is absolutely impossible for me--

krogstad. we won't talk about that until later on. this is something
different. i presume you can give me a moment?

nora. yes--yes, i can--although--

krogstad. good. i was in olsen's restaurant and saw your husband going
down the street--

nora. yes?

krogstad. with a lady.

nora. what then?

krogstad. may i make so bold as to ask if it was a mrs. linde?

nora. it was.

krogstad. just arrived in town?

nora. yes, today.

krogstad. she is a great friend of yours, isn't she?

nora. she is. but i don't see--

krogstad. i knew her too, once upon a time.

nora. i am aware of that.

krogstad. are you? so you know all about it; i thought as much. then i
can ask you, without beating about the bush--is mrs. linde to have an
appointment in the bank?

nora. what right have you to question me, mr. krogstad?--you, one of
my husband's subordinates! but since you ask, you shall know. yes, mrs.
linde is to have an appointment. and it was i who pleaded her cause, mr.
krogstad, let me tell you that.

krogstad. i was right in what i thought, then.

nora (walking up and down the stage). sometimes one has a tiny little
bit of influence, i should hope. because one is a woman, it does not
necessarily follow that--. when anyone is in a subordinate position,
mr. krogstad, they should really be careful to avoid offending anyone
who--who--

krogstad. who has influence?

nora. exactly.

krogstad (changing his tone). mrs. helmer, you will be so good as to use
your influence on my behalf.

nora. what? what do you mean?

krogstad. you will be so kind as to see that i am allowed to keep my
subordinate position in the bank.

nora. what do you mean by that? who proposes to take your post away from
you?

krogstad. oh, there is no necessity to keep up the pretence of
ignorance. i can quite understand that your friend is not very anxious
to expose herself to the chance of rubbing shoulders with me; and i
quite understand, too, whom i have to thank for being turned off.

nora. but i assure you--

krogstad. very likely; but, to come to the point, the time has come when
i should advise you to use your influence to prevent that.

nora. but, mr. krogstad, i have no influence.

krogstad. haven't you? i thought you said yourself just now--

nora. naturally i did not mean you to put that construction on it. i!
what should make you think i have any influence of that kind with my
husband?

krogstad. oh, i have known your husband from our student days. i don't
suppose he is any more unassailable than other husbands.

nora. if you speak slightingly of my husband, i shall turn you out of
the house.

krogstad. you are bold, mrs. helmer.

nora. i am not afraid of you any longer. as soon as the new year comes,
i shall in a very short time be free of the whole thing.

krogstad (controlling himself). listen to me, mrs. helmer. if necessary,
i am prepared to fight for my small post in the bank as if i were
fighting for my life.

nora. so it seems.

krogstad. it is not only for the sake of the money; indeed, that weighs
least with me in the matter. there is another reason--well, i may as
well tell you. my position is this. i daresay you know, like everybody
else, that once, many years ago, i was guilty of an indiscretion.

nora. i think i have heard something of the kind.

krogstad. the matter never came into court; but every way seemed to be
closed to me after that. so i took to the business that you know of. i
had to do something; and, honestly, i don't think i've been one of the
worst. but now i must cut myself free from all that. my sons are growing
up; for their sake i must try and win back as much respect as i can in
the town. this post in the bank was like the first step up for me--and
now your husband is going to kick me downstairs again into the mud.

nora. but you must believe me, mr. krogstad; it is not in my power to
help you at all.

krogstad. then it is because you haven't the will; but i have means to
compel you.

nora. you don't mean that you will tell my husband that i owe you money?

krogstad. hm!--suppose i were to tell him?

nora. it would be perfectly infamous of you. (sobbing.) to think of his
learning my secret, which has been my joy and pride, in such an ugly,
clumsy way--that he should learn it from you! and it would put me in a
horribly disagreeable position--

krogstad. only disagreeable?

nora (impetuously). well, do it, then!--and it will be the worse for
you. my husband will see for himself what a blackguard you are, and you
certainly won't keep your post then.

krogstad. i asked you if it was only a disagreeable scene at home that
you were afraid of?

nora. if my husband does get to know of it, of course he will at once
pay you what is still owing, and we shall have nothing more to do with
you.

krogstad (coming a step nearer). listen to me, mrs. helmer. either you
have a very bad memory or you know very little of business. i shall be
obliged to remind you of a few details.

nora. what do you mean?

krogstad. when your husband was ill, you came to me to borrow two
hundred and fifty pounds.

nora. i didn't know anyone else to go to.

krogstad. i promised to get you that amount--

nora. yes, and you did so.

krogstad. i promised to get you that amount, on certain conditions.
your mind was so taken up with your husband's illness, and you were so
anxious to get the money for your journey, that you seem to have paid
no attention to the conditions of our bargain. therefore it will not be
amiss if i remind you of them. now, i promised to get the money on the
security of a bond which i drew up.

nora. yes, and which i signed.

krogstad. good. but below your signature there were a few lines
constituting your father a surety for the money; those lines your father
should have signed.

nora. should? he did sign them.

krogstad. i had left the date blank; that is to say, your father should
himself have inserted the date on which he signed the paper. do you
remember that?

nora. yes, i think i remember--

krogstad. then i gave you the bond to send by post to your father. is
that not so?

nora. yes.

krogstad. and you naturally did so at once, because five or six days
afterwards you brought me the bond with your father's signature. and
then i gave you the money.

nora. well, haven't i been paying it off regularly?

krogstad. fairly so, yes. but--to come back to the matter in hand--that
must have been a very trying time for you, mrs. helmer?

nora. it was, indeed.

krogstad. your father was very ill, wasn't he?

nora. he was very near his end.

krogstad. and died soon afterwards?

nora. yes.

krogstad. tell me, mrs. helmer, can you by any chance remember what day
your father died?--on what day of the month, i mean.

nora. papa died on the 29th of september.

krogstad. that is correct; i have ascertained it for myself. and, as
that is so, there is a discrepancy (taking a paper from his pocket)
which i cannot account for.

nora. what discrepancy? i don't know--

krogstad. the discrepancy consists, mrs. helmer, in the fact that your
father signed this bond three days after his death.

nora. what do you mean? i don't understand--

krogstad. your father died on the 29th of september. but, look here;
your father has dated his signature the 2nd of october. it is a
discrepancy, isn't it? (nora is silent.) can you explain it to me? (nora
is still silent.) it is a remarkable thing, too, that the words "2nd
of october," as well as the year, are not written in your father's
handwriting but in one that i think i know. well, of course it can be
explained; your father may have forgotten to date his signature, and
someone else may have dated it haphazard before they knew of his death.
there is no harm in that. it all depends on the signature of the name;
and that is genuine, i suppose, mrs. helmer? it was your father himself
who signed his name here?

nora (after a short pause, throws her head up and looks defiantly at
him). no, it was not. it was i that wrote papa's name.

krogstad. are you aware that is a dangerous confession?

nora. in what way? you shall have your money soon.

krogstad. let me ask you a question; why did you not send the paper to
your father?

nora. it was impossible; papa was so ill. if i had asked him for his
signature, i should have had to tell him what the money was to be
used for; and when he was so ill himself i couldn't tell him that my
husband's life was in danger--it was impossible.

krogstad. it would have been better for you if you had given up your
trip abroad.

nora. no, that was impossible. that trip was to save my husband's life;
i couldn't give that up.

krogstad. but did it never occur to you that you were committing a fraud
on me?

nora. i couldn't take that into account; i didn't trouble myself about
you at all. i couldn't bear you, because you put so many heartless
difficulties in my way, although you knew what a dangerous condition my
husband was in.

krogstad. mrs. helmer, you evidently do not realise clearly what it is
that you have been guilty of. but i can assure you that my one false
step, which lost me all my reputation, was nothing more or nothing worse
than what you have done.

nora. you? do you ask me to believe that you were brave enough to run a
risk to save your wife's life?

krogstad. the law cares nothing about motives.

nora. then it must be a very foolish law.

krogstad. foolish or not, it is the law by which you will be judged, if
i produce this paper in court.

nora. i don't believe it. is a daughter not to be allowed to spare her
dying father anxiety and care? is a wife not to be allowed to save her
husband's life? i don't know much about law; but i am certain that there
must be laws permitting such things as that. have you no knowledge of
such laws--you who are a lawyer? you must be a very poor lawyer, mr.
krogstad.

krogstad. maybe. but matters of business--such business as you and i
have had together--do you think i don't understand that? very well. do
as you please. but let me tell you this--if i lose my position a second
time, you shall lose yours with me. (he bows, and goes out through the
hall.)

nora (appears buried in thought for a short time, then tosses her head).
nonsense! trying to frighten me like that!--i am not so silly as he
thinks. (begins to busy herself putting the children's things in order.)
and yet--? no, it's impossible! i did it for love's sake.

the children (in the doorway on the left). mother, the stranger man has
gone out through the gate.

nora. yes, dears, i know. but, don't tell anyone about the stranger man.
do you hear? not even papa.

children. no, mother; but will you come and play again?

nora. no, no,--not now.

children. but, mother, you promised us.

nora. yes, but i can't now. run away in; i have such a lot to do. run
away in, my sweet little darlings. (she gets them into the room by
degrees and shuts the door on them; then sits down on the sofa, takes
up a piece of needlework and sews a few stitches, but soon stops.) no!
(throws down the work, gets up, goes to the hall door and calls out.)
helen! bring the tree in. (goes to the table on the left, opens a
drawer, and stops again.) no, no! it is quite impossible!

maid (coming in with the tree). where shall i put it, ma'am?

nora. here, in the middle of the floor.

maid. shall i get you anything else?

nora. no, thank you. i have all i want. [exit maid.]

nora (begins dressing the tree). a candle here-and flowers here--the
horrible man! it's all nonsense--there's nothing wrong. the tree
shall be splendid! i will do everything i can think of to please you,
torvald!--i will sing for you, dance for you--(helmer comes in with some
papers under his arm.) oh! are you back already?

helmer. yes. has anyone been here?

nora. here? no.

helmer. that is strange. i saw krogstad going out of the gate.

nora. did you? oh yes, i forgot, krogstad was here for a moment.

helmer. nora, i can see from your manner that he has been here begging
you to say a good word for him.

nora. yes.

helmer. and you were to appear to do it of your own accord; you were to
conceal from me the fact of his having been here; didn't he beg that of
you too?

nora. yes, torvald, but--

helmer. nora, nora, and you would be a party to that sort of thing? to
have any talk with a man like that, and give him any sort of promise?
and to tell me a lie into the bargain?

nora. a lie--?

helmer. didn't you tell me no one had been here? (shakes his finger at
her.) my little songbird must never do that again. a songbird must have
a clean beak to chirp with--no false notes! (puts his arm round her
waist.) that is so, isn't it? yes, i am sure it is. (lets her go.) we
will say no more about it. (sits down by the stove.) how warm and snug
it is here! (turns over his papers.)

nora (after a short pause, during which she busies herself with the
christmas tree.) torvald!

helmer. yes.

nora. i am looking forward tremendously to the fancy-dress ball at the
stenborgs' the day after tomorrow.

helmer. and i am tremendously curious to see what you are going to
surprise me with.

nora. it was very silly of me to want to do that.

helmer. what do you mean?

nora. i can't hit upon anything that will do; everything i think of
seems so silly and insignificant.

helmer. does my little nora acknowledge that at last?

nora (standing behind his chair with her arms on the back of it). are
you very busy, torvald?

helmer. well--

nora. what are all those papers?

helmer. bank business.

nora. already?

helmer. i have got authority from the retiring manager to undertake the
necessary changes in the staff and in the rearrangement of the work; and
i must make use of the christmas week for that, so as to have everything
in order for the new year.

nora. then that was why this poor krogstad--

helmer. hm!

nora (leans against the back of his chair and strokes his hair). if you
hadn't been so busy i should have asked you a tremendously big favour,
torvald.

helmer. what is that? tell me.

nora. there is no one has such good taste as you. and i do so want to
look nice at the fancy-dress ball. torvald, couldn't you take me in hand
and decide what i shall go as, and what sort of a dress i shall wear?

helmer. aha! so my obstinate little woman is obliged to get someone to
come to her rescue?

nora. yes, torvald, i can't get along a bit without your help.

helmer. very well, i will think it over, we shall manage to hit upon
something.

nora. that is nice of you. (goes to the christmas tree. a short pause.)
how pretty the red flowers look--. but, tell me, was it really something
very bad that this krogstad was guilty of?

helmer. he forged someone's name. have you any idea what that means?

nora. isn't it possible that he was driven to do it by necessity?

helmer. yes; or, as in so many cases, by imprudence. i am not so
heartless as to condemn a man altogether because of a single false step
of that kind.

nora. no, you wouldn't, would you, torvald?

helmer. many a man has been able to retrieve his character, if he has
openly confessed his fault and taken his punishment.

nora. punishment--?

helmer. but krogstad did nothing of that sort; he got himself out of it
by a cunning trick, and that is why he has gone under altogether.

nora. but do you think it would--?

helmer. just think how a guilty man like that has to lie and play the
hypocrite with every one, how he has to wear a mask in the presence of
those near and dear to him, even before his own wife and children. and
about the children--that is the most terrible part of it all, nora.

nora. how?

helmer. because such an atmosphere of lies infects and poisons the whole
life of a home. each breath the children take in such a house is full of
the germs of evil.

nora (coming nearer him). are you sure of that?

helmer. my dear, i have often seen it in the course of my life as a
lawyer. almost everyone who has gone to the bad early in life has had a
deceitful mother.

nora. why do you only say--mother?

helmer. it seems most commonly to be the mother's influence, though
naturally a bad father's would have the same result. every lawyer
is familiar with the fact. this krogstad, now, has been persistently
poisoning his own children with lies and dissimulation; that is why i
say he has lost all moral character. (holds out his hands to her.) that
is why my sweet little nora must promise me not to plead his cause. give
me your hand on it. come, come, what is this? give me your hand. there
now, that's settled. i assure you it would be quite impossible for me to
work with him; i literally feel physically ill when i am in the company
of such people.

nora (takes her hand out of his and goes to the opposite side of the
christmas tree). how hot it is in here; and i have such a lot to do.

helmer (getting up and putting his papers in order). yes, and i must
try and read through some of these before dinner; and i must think about
your costume, too. and it is just possible i may have something ready
in gold paper to hang up on the tree. (puts his hand on her head.) my
precious little singing-bird! (he goes into his room and shuts the door
after him.)

nora (after a pause, whispers). no, no--it isn't true. it's impossible;
it must be impossible.

(the nurse opens the door on the left.)

nurse. the little ones are begging so hard to be allowed to come in to
mamma.

nora. no, no, no! don't let them come in to me! you stay with them,
anne.

nurse. very well, ma'am. (shuts the door.)

nora (pale with terror). deprave my little children? poison my home? (a
short pause. then she tosses her head.) it's not true. it can't possibly
be true.




act ii

(the same scene.--the christmas tree is in the corner by the piano,
stripped of its ornaments and with burnt-down candle-ends on its
dishevelled branches. nora's cloak and hat are lying on the sofa. she
is alone in the room, walking about uneasily. she stops by the sofa and
takes up her cloak.)

nora (drops her cloak). someone is coming now! (goes to the door and
listens.) no--it is no one. of course, no one will come today, christmas
day--nor tomorrow either. but, perhaps--(opens the door and looks out).
no, nothing in the letterbox; it is quite empty. (comes forward.)
what rubbish! of course he can't be in earnest about it. such a thing
couldn't happen; it is impossible--i have three little children.

(enter the nurse from the room on the left, carrying a big cardboard
box.)

nurse. at last i have found the box with the fancy dress.

nora. thanks; put it on the table.

nurse (doing so). but it is very much in want of mending.

nora. i should like to tear it into a hundred thousand pieces.

nurse. what an idea! it can easily be put in order--just a little
patience.

nora. yes, i will go and get mrs. linde to come and help me with it.

nurse. what, out again? in this horrible weather? you will catch cold,
ma'am, and make yourself ill.

nora. well, worse than that might happen. how are the children?

nurse. the poor little souls are playing with their christmas presents,
but--

nora. do they ask much for me?

nurse. you see, they are so accustomed to have their mamma with them.

nora. yes, but, nurse, i shall not be able to be so much with them now
as i was before.

nurse. oh well, young children easily get accustomed to anything.

nora. do you think so? do you think they would forget their mother if
she went away altogether?

nurse. good heavens!--went away altogether?

nora. nurse, i want you to tell me something i have often wondered
about--how could you have the heart to put your own child out among
strangers?

nurse. i was obliged to, if i wanted to be little nora's nurse.

nora. yes, but how could you be willing to do it?

nurse. what, when i was going to get such a good place by it? a poor
girl who has got into trouble should be glad to. besides, that wicked
man didn't do a single thing for me.

nora. but i suppose your daughter has quite forgotten you.

nurse. no, indeed she hasn't. she wrote to me when she was confirmed,
and when she was married.

nora (putting her arms round her neck). dear old anne, you were a good
mother to me when i was little.

nurse. little nora, poor dear, had no other mother but me.

nora. and if my little ones had no other mother, i am sure you
would--what nonsense i am talking! (opens the box.) go in to them.
now i must--. you will see tomorrow how charming i shall look.

nurse. i am sure there will be no one at the ball so charming as you,
ma'am. (goes into the room on the left.)

nora (begins to unpack the box, but soon pushes it away from her). if
only i dared go out. if only no one would come. if only i could be sure
nothing would happen here in the meantime. stuff and nonsense! no one
will come. only i mustn't think about it. i will brush my muff. what
lovely, lovely gloves! out of my thoughts, out of my thoughts! one,
two, three, four, five, six-- (screams.) ah! there is someone coming--.
(makes a movement towards the door, but stands irresolute.)

(enter mrs. linde from the hall, where she has taken off her cloak and
hat.)

nora. oh, it's you, christine. there is no one else out there, is there?
how good of you to come!

mrs. linde. i heard you were up asking for me.

nora. yes, i was passing by. as a matter of fact, it is something
you could help me with. let us sit down here on the sofa. look here.
tomorrow evening there is to be a fancy-dress ball at the stenborgs',
who live above us; and torvald wants me to go as a neapolitan
fisher-girl, and dance the tarantella that i learned at capri.

mrs. linde. i see; you are going to keep up the character.

nora. yes, torvald wants me to. look, here is the dress; torvald had it
made for me there, but now it is all so torn, and i haven't any idea--

mrs. linde. we will easily put that right. it is only some of the
trimming come unsewn here and there. needle and thread? now then, that's
all we want.

nora. it is nice of you.

mrs. linde (sewing). so you are going to be dressed up tomorrow nora.
i will tell you what--i shall come in for a moment and see you in
your fine feathers. but i have completely forgotten to thank you for a
delightful evening yesterday.

nora (gets up, and crosses the stage). well, i don't think yesterday was
as pleasant as usual. you ought to have come to town a little earlier,
christine. certainly torvald does understand how to make a house dainty
and attractive.

mrs. linde. and so do you, it seems to me; you are not your father's
daughter for nothing. but tell me, is doctor rank always as depressed as
he was yesterday?

nora. no; yesterday it was very noticeable. i must tell you that he
suffers from a very dangerous disease. he has consumption of the spine,
poor creature. his father was a horrible man who committed all sorts
of excesses; and that is why his son was sickly from childhood, do you
understand?

mrs. linde (dropping her sewing). but, my dearest nora, how do you know
anything about such things?

nora (walking about). pooh! when you have three children, you get visits
now and then from--from married women, who know something of medical
matters, and they talk about one thing and another.

mrs. linde (goes on sewing. a short silence). does doctor rank come here
everyday?

nora. everyday regularly. he is torvald's most intimate friend, and a
great friend of mine too. he is just like one of the family.

mrs. linde. but tell me this--is he perfectly sincere? i mean, isn't he
the kind of man that is very anxious to make himself agreeable?

nora. not in the least. what makes you think that?

mrs. linde. when you introduced him to me yesterday, he declared he had
often heard my name mentioned in this house; but afterwards i noticed
that your husband hadn't the slightest idea who i was. so how could
doctor rank--?

nora. that is quite right, christine. torvald is so absurdly fond of me
that he wants me absolutely to himself, as he says. at first he used
to seem almost jealous if i mentioned any of the dear folk at home, so
naturally i gave up doing so. but i often talk about such things with
doctor rank, because he likes hearing about them.

mrs. linde. listen to me, nora. you are still very like a child in many
things, and i am older than you in many ways and have a little more
experience. let me tell you this--you ought to make an end of it with
doctor rank.

nora. what ought i to make an end of?

mrs. linde. of two things, i think. yesterday you talked some nonsense
about a rich admirer who was to leave you money--

nora. an admirer who doesn't exist, unfortunately! but what then?

mrs. linde. is doctor rank a man of means?

nora. yes, he is.

mrs. linde. and has no one to provide for?

nora. no, no one; but--

mrs. linde. and comes here everyday?

nora. yes, i told you so.

mrs. linde. but how can this well-bred man be so tactless?

nora. i don't understand you at all.

mrs. linde. don't prevaricate, nora. do you suppose i don't guess who
lent you the two hundred and fifty pounds?

nora. are you out of your senses? how can you think of such a thing! a
friend of ours, who comes here everyday! do you realise what a horribly
painful position that would be?

mrs. linde. then it really isn't he?

nora. no, certainly not. it would never have entered into my head for
a moment. besides, he had no money to lend then; he came into his money
afterwards.

mrs. linde. well, i think that was lucky for you, my dear nora.

nora. no, it would never have come into my head to ask doctor rank.
although i am quite sure that if i had asked him--

mrs. linde. but of course you won't.

nora. of course not. i have no reason to think it could possibly be
necessary. but i am quite sure that if i told doctor rank--

mrs. linde. behind your husband's back?

nora. i must make an end of it with the other one, and that will be
behind his back too. i must make an end of it with him.

mrs. linde. yes, that is what i told you yesterday, but--

nora (walking up and down). a man can put a thing like that straight
much easier than a woman--

mrs. linde. one's husband, yes.

nora. nonsense! (standing still.) when you pay off a debt you get your
bond back, don't you?

mrs. linde. yes, as a matter of course.

nora. and can tear it into a hundred thousand pieces, and burn it
up--the nasty dirty paper!

mrs. linde (looks hard at her, lays down her sewing and gets up slowly).
nora, you are concealing something from me.

nora. do i look as if i were?

mrs. linde. something has happened to you since yesterday morning. nora,
what is it?

nora (going nearer to her). christine! (listens.) hush! there's torvald
come home. do you mind going in to the children for the present? torvald
can't bear to see dressmaking going on. let anne help you.

mrs. linde (gathering some of the things together). certainly--but i am
not going away from here until we have had it out with one another. (she
goes into the room on the left, as helmer comes in from the hall.)

nora (going up to helmer). i have wanted you so much, torvald dear.

helmer. was that the dressmaker?

nora. no, it was christine; she is helping me to put my dress in order.
you will see i shall look quite smart.

helmer. wasn't that a happy thought of mine, now?

nora. splendid! but don't you think it is nice of me, too, to do as you
wish?

helmer. nice?--because you do as your husband wishes? well, well, you
little rogue, i am sure you did not mean it in that way. but i am
not going to disturb you; you will want to be trying on your dress, i
expect.

nora. i suppose you are going to work.

helmer. yes. (shows her a bundle of papers.) look at that. i have just
been into the bank. (turns to go into his room.)

nora. torvald.

helmer. yes.

nora. if your little squirrel were to ask you for something very, very
prettily--?

helmer. what then?

nora. would you do it?

helmer. i should like to hear what it is, first.

nora. your squirrel would run about and do all her tricks if you would
be nice, and do what she wants.

helmer. speak plainly.

nora. your skylark would chirp about in every room, with her song rising
and falling--

helmer. well, my skylark does that anyhow.

nora. i would play the fairy and dance for you in the moonlight,
torvald.

helmer. nora--you surely don't mean that request you made to me this
morning?

nora (going near him). yes, torvald, i beg you so earnestly--

helmer. have you really the courage to open up that question again?

nora. yes, dear, you must do as i ask; you must let krogstad keep his
post in the bank.

helmer. my dear nora, it is his post that i have arranged mrs. linde
shall have.

nora. yes, you have been awfully kind about that; but you could just as
well dismiss some other clerk instead of krogstad.

helmer. this is simply incredible obstinacy! because you chose to give
him a thoughtless promise that you would speak for him, i am expected
to--

nora. that isn't the reason, torvald. it is for your own sake. this
fellow writes in the most scurrilous newspapers; you have told me so
yourself. he can do you an unspeakable amount of harm. i am frightened
to death of him--

helmer. ah, i understand; it is recollections of the past that scare
you.

nora. what do you mean?

helmer. naturally you are thinking of your father.

nora. yes--yes, of course. just recall to your mind what these malicious
creatures wrote in the papers about papa, and how horribly they
slandered him. i believe they would have procured his dismissal if the
department had not sent you over to inquire into it, and if you had not
been so kindly disposed and helpful to him.

helmer. my little nora, there is an important difference between your
father and me. your father's reputation as a public official was not
above suspicion. mine is, and i hope it will continue to be so, as long
as i hold my office.

nora. you never can tell what mischief these men may contrive. we ought
to be so well off, so snug and happy here in our peaceful home, and have
no cares--you and i and the children, torvald! that is why i beg you so
earnestly--

helmer. and it is just by interceding for him that you make it
impossible for me to keep him. it is already known at the bank that i
mean to dismiss krogstad. is it to get about now that the new manager
has changed his mind at his wife's bidding--

nora. and what if it did?

helmer. of course!--if only this obstinate little person can get her
way! do you suppose i am going to make myself ridiculous before my whole
staff, to let people think that i am a man to be swayed by all sorts of
outside influence? i should very soon feel the consequences of it, i can
tell you! and besides, there is one thing that makes it quite impossible
for me to have krogstad in the bank as long as i am manager.

nora. whatever is that?

helmer. his moral failings i might perhaps have overlooked, if
necessary--

nora. yes, you could--couldn't you?

helmer. and i hear he is a good worker, too. but i knew him when we
were boys. it was one of those rash friendships that so often prove an
incubus in afterlife. i may as well tell you plainly, we were once on
very intimate terms with one another. but this tactless fellow lays no
restraint on himself when other people are present. on the contrary,
he thinks it gives him the right to adopt a familiar tone with me, and
every minute it is "i say, helmer, old fellow!" and that sort of thing.
i assure you it is extremely painful for me. he would make my position
in the bank intolerable.

nora. torvald, i don't believe you mean that.

helmer. don't you? why not?

nora. because it is such a narrow-minded way of looking at things.

helmer. what are you saying? narrow-minded? do you think i am
narrow-minded?

nora. no, just the opposite, dear--and it is exactly for that reason.

helmer. it's the same thing. you say my point of view is narrow-minded,
so i must be so too. narrow-minded! very well--i must put an end to
this. (goes to the hall door and calls.) helen!

nora. what are you going to do?

helmer (looking among his papers). settle it. (enter maid.) look here;
take this letter and go downstairs with it at once. find a messenger and
tell him to deliver it, and be quick. the address is on it, and here is
the money.

maid. very well, sir. (exit with the letter.)

helmer (putting his papers together). now then, little miss obstinate.

nora (breathlessly). torvald--what was that letter?

helmer. krogstad's dismissal.

nora. call her back, torvald! there is still time. oh torvald, call her
back! do it for my sake--for your own sake--for the children's sake! do
you hear me, torvald? call her back! you don't know what that letter can
bring upon us.

helmer. it's too late.

nora. yes, it's too late.

helmer. my dear nora, i can forgive the anxiety you are in, although
really it is an insult to me. it is, indeed. isn't it an insult to think
that i should be afraid of a starving quill-driver's vengeance? but i
forgive you nevertheless, because it is such eloquent witness to your
great love for me. (takes her in his arms.) and that is as it should be,
my own darling nora. come what will, you may be sure i shall have both
courage and strength if they be needed. you will see i am man enough to
take everything upon myself.

nora (in a horror-stricken voice). what do you mean by that?

helmer. everything, i say--

nora (recovering herself). you will never have to do that.

helmer. that's right. well, we will share it, nora, as man and wife
should. that is how it shall be. (caressing her.) are you content now?
there! there!--not these frightened dove's eyes! the whole thing is only
the wildest fancy!--now, you must go and play through the tarantella and
practise with your tambourine. i shall go into the inner office and shut
the door, and i shall hear nothing; you can make as much noise as you
please. (turns back at the door.) and when rank comes, tell him where he
will find me. (nods to her, takes his papers and goes into his room, and
shuts the door after him.)

nora (bewildered with anxiety, stands as if rooted to the spot, and
whispers). he was capable of doing it. he will do it. he will do it in
spite of everything.--no, not that! never, never! anything rather than
that! oh, for some help, some way out of it! (the door-bell rings.)
doctor rank! anything rather than that--anything, whatever it is! (she
puts her hands over her face, pulls herself together, goes to the door
and opens it. rank is standing without, hanging up his coat. during the
following dialogue it begins to grow dark.)

nora. good day, doctor rank. i knew your ring. but you mustn't go in to
torvald now; i think he is busy with something.

rank. and you?

nora (brings him in and shuts the door after him). oh, you know very
well i always have time for you.

rank. thank you. i shall make use of as much of it as i can.

nora. what do you mean by that? as much of it as you can?

rank. well, does that alarm you?

nora. it was such a strange way of putting it. is anything likely to
happen?

rank. nothing but what i have long been prepared for. but i certainly
didn't expect it to happen so soon.

nora (gripping him by the arm). what have you found out? doctor rank,
you must tell me.

rank (sitting down by the stove). it is all up with me. and it can't be
helped.

nora (with a sigh of relief). is it about yourself?

rank. who else? it is no use lying to one's self. i am the most wretched
of all my patients, mrs. helmer. lately i have been taking stock of my
internal economy. bankrupt! probably within a month i shall lie rotting
in the churchyard.

nora. what an ugly thing to say!

rank. the thing itself is cursedly ugly, and the worst of it is that i
shall have to face so much more that is ugly before that. i shall only
make one more examination of myself; when i have done that, i shall know
pretty certainly when it will be that the horrors of dissolution will
begin. there is something i want to tell you. helmer's refined nature
gives him an unconquerable disgust at everything that is ugly; i won't
have him in my sick-room.

nora. oh, but, doctor rank--

rank. i won't have him there. not on any account. i bar my door to him.
as soon as i am quite certain that the worst has come, i shall send
you my card with a black cross on it, and then you will know that the
loathsome end has begun.

nora. you are quite absurd today. and i wanted you so much to be in a
really good humour.

rank. with death stalking beside me?--to have to pay this penalty for
another man's sin? is there any justice in that? and in every single
family, in one way or another, some such inexorable retribution is being
exacted--

nora (putting her hands over her ears). rubbish! do talk of something
cheerful.

rank. oh, it's a mere laughing matter, the whole thing. my poor innocent
spine has to suffer for my father's youthful amusements.

nora (sitting at the table on the left). i suppose you mean that he was
too partial to asparagus and pate de foie gras, don't you?

rank. yes, and to truffles.

nora. truffles, yes. and oysters too, i suppose?

rank. oysters, of course, that goes without saying.

nora. and heaps of port and champagne. it is sad that all these nice
things should take their revenge on our bones.

rank. especially that they should revenge themselves on the unlucky
bones of those who have not had the satisfaction of enjoying them.

nora. yes, that's the saddest part of it all.

rank (with a searching look at her). hm!--

nora (after a short pause). why did you smile?

rank. no, it was you that laughed.

nora. no, it was you that smiled, doctor rank!

rank (rising). you are a greater rascal than i thought.

nora. i am in a silly mood today.

rank. so it seems.

nora (putting her hands on his shoulders). dear, dear doctor rank, death
mustn't take you away from torvald and me.

rank. it is a loss you would easily recover from. those who are gone are
soon forgotten.

nora (looking at him anxiously). do you believe that?

rank. people form new ties, and then--

nora. who will form new ties?

rank. both you and helmer, when i am gone. you yourself are already on
the high road to it, i think. what did that mrs. linde want here last
night?

nora. oho!--you don't mean to say you are jealous of poor christine?

rank. yes, i am. she will be my successor in this house. when i am done
for, this woman will--

nora. hush! don't speak so loud. she is in that room.

rank. today again. there, you see.

nora. she has only come to sew my dress for me. bless my soul, how
unreasonable you are! (sits down on the sofa.) be nice now, doctor rank,
and tomorrow you will see how beautifully i shall dance, and you can
imagine i am doing it all for you--and for torvald too, of course.
(takes various things out of the box.) doctor rank, come and sit down
here, and i will show you something.

rank (sitting down). what is it?

nora. just look at those!

rank. silk stockings.

nora. flesh-coloured. aren't they lovely? it is so dark here now, but
tomorrow--. no, no, no! you must only look at the feet. oh well, you may
have leave to look at the legs too.

rank. hm!--nora. why are you looking so critical? don't you think they
will fit me?

rank. i have no means of forming an opinion about that.

nora (looks at him for a moment). for shame! (hits him lightly on the
ear with the stockings.) that's to punish you. (folds them up again.)

rank. and what other nice things am i to be allowed to see?

nora. not a single thing more, for being so naughty. (she looks among
the things, humming to herself.)

rank (after a short silence). when i am sitting here, talking to you as
intimately as this, i cannot imagine for a moment what would have become
of me if i had never come into this house.

nora (smiling). i believe you do feel thoroughly at home with us.

rank (in a lower voice, looking straight in front of him). and to be
obliged to leave it all--

nora. nonsense, you are not going to leave it.

rank (as before). and not be able to leave behind one the slightest
token of one's gratitude, scarcely even a fleeting regret--nothing but
an empty place which the first comer can fill as well as any other.

nora. and if i asked you now for a--? no!

rank. for what?

nora. for a big proof of your friendship--

rank. yes, yes!

nora. i mean a tremendously big favour--

rank. would you really make me so happy for once?

nora. ah, but you don't know what it is yet.

rank. no--but tell me.

nora. i really can't, doctor rank. it is something out of all reason; it
means advice, and help, and a favour--

rank. the bigger a thing it is the better. i can't conceive what it is
you mean. do tell me. haven't i your confidence?

nora. more than anyone else. i know you are my truest and best friend,
and so i will tell you what it is. well, doctor rank, it is something
you must help me to prevent. you know how devotedly, how inexpressibly
deeply torvald loves me; he would never for a moment hesitate to give
his life for me.

rank (leaning towards her). nora--do you think he is the only one--?

nora (with a slight start). the only one--?

rank. the only one who would gladly give his life for your sake.

nora (sadly). is that it?

rank. i was determined you should know it before i went away, and there
will never be a better opportunity than this. now you know it, nora. and
now you know, too, that you can trust me as you would trust no one else.

nora (rises, deliberately and quietly). let me pass.

rank (makes room for her to pass him, but sits still). nora!

nora (at the hall door). helen, bring in the lamp. (goes over to the
stove.) dear doctor rank, that was really horrid of you.

rank. to have loved you as much as anyone else does? was that horrid?

nora. no, but to go and tell me so. there was really no need--

rank. what do you mean? did you know--? (maid enters with lamp, puts it
down on the table, and goes out.) nora--mrs. helmer--tell me, had you
any idea of this?

nora. oh, how do i know whether i had or whether i hadn't? i really
can't tell you--to think you could be so clumsy, doctor rank! we were
getting on so nicely.

rank. well, at all events you know now that you can command me, body and
soul. so won't you speak out?

nora (looking at him). after what happened?

rank. i beg you to let me know what it is.

nora. i can't tell you anything now.

rank. yes, yes. you mustn't punish me in that way. let me have
permission to do for you whatever a man may do.

nora. you can do nothing for me now. besides, i really don't need any
help at all. you will find that the whole thing is merely fancy on my
part. it really is so--of course it is! (sits down in the rocking-chair,
and looks at him with a smile.) you are a nice sort of man, doctor
rank!--don't you feel ashamed of yourself, now the lamp has come?

rank. not a bit. but perhaps i had better go--for ever?

nora. no, indeed, you shall not. of course you must come here just as
before. you know very well torvald can't do without you.

rank. yes, but you?

nora. oh, i am always tremendously pleased when you come.

rank. it is just that, that put me on the wrong track. you are a riddle
to me. i have often thought that you would almost as soon be in my
company as in helmer's.

nora. yes--you see there are some people one loves best, and others whom
one would almost always rather have as companions.

rank. yes, there is something in that.

nora. when i was at home, of course i loved papa best. but i always
thought it tremendous fun if i could steal down into the maids' room,
because they never moralised at all, and talked to each other about such
entertaining things.

rank. i see--it is their place i have taken.

nora (jumping up and going to him). oh, dear, nice doctor rank, i never
meant that at all. but surely you can understand that being with torvald
is a little like being with papa--(enter maid from the hall.)

maid. if you please, ma'am. (whispers and hands her a card.)

nora (glancing at the card). oh! (puts it in her pocket.)

rank. is there anything wrong?

nora. no, no, not in the least. it is only something--it is my new
dress--

rank. what? your dress is lying there.

nora. oh, yes, that one; but this is another. i ordered it. torvald
mustn't know about it--

rank. oho! then that was the great secret.

nora. of course. just go in to him; he is sitting in the inner room.
keep him as long as--

rank. make your mind easy; i won't let him escape.

(goes into helmer's room.)

nora (to the maid). and he is standing waiting in the kitchen?

maid. yes; he came up the back stairs.

nora. but didn't you tell him no one was in?

maid. yes, but it was no good.

nora. he won't go away?

maid. no; he says he won't until he has seen you, ma'am.

nora. well, let him come in--but quietly. helen, you mustn't say
anything about it to anyone. it is a surprise for my husband.

maid. yes, ma'am, i quite understand. (exit.)

nora. this dreadful thing is going to happen! it will happen in spite of
me! no, no, no, it can't happen--it shan't happen! (she bolts the door
of helmer's room. the maid opens the hall door for krogstad and shuts it
after him. he is wearing a fur coat, high boots and a fur cap.)

nora (advancing towards him). speak low--my husband is at home.

krogstad. no matter about that.

nora. what do you want of me?

krogstad. an explanation of something.

nora. make haste then. what is it?

krogstad. you know, i suppose, that i have got my dismissal.

nora. i couldn't prevent it, mr. krogstad. i fought as hard as i could
on your side, but it was no good.

krogstad. does your husband love you so little, then? he knows what i
can expose you to, and yet he ventures--

nora. how can you suppose that he has any knowledge of the sort?

krogstad. i didn't suppose so at all. it would not be the least like our
dear torvald helmer to show so much courage--

nora. mr. krogstad, a little respect for my husband, please.

krogstad. certainly--all the respect he deserves. but since you have
kept the matter so carefully to yourself, i make bold to suppose that
you have a little clearer idea, than you had yesterday, of what it
actually is that you have done?

nora. more than you could ever teach me.

krogstad. yes, such a bad lawyer as i am.

nora. what is it you want of me?

krogstad. only to see how you were, mrs. helmer. i have been thinking
about you all day long. a mere cashier, a quill-driver, a--well, a man
like me--even he has a little of what is called feeling, you know.

nora. show it, then; think of my little children.

krogstad. have you and your husband thought of mine? but never mind
about that. i only wanted to tell you that you need not take this matter
too seriously. in the first place there will be no accusation made on my
part.

nora. no, of course not; i was sure of that.

krogstad. the whole thing can be arranged amicably; there is no reason
why anyone should know anything about it. it will remain a secret
between us three.

nora. my husband must never get to know anything about it.

krogstad. how will you be able to prevent it? am i to understand that
you can pay the balance that is owing?

nora. no, not just at present.

krogstad. or perhaps that you have some expedient for raising the money
soon?

nora. no expedient that i mean to make use of.

krogstad. well, in any case, it would have been of no use to you now. if
you stood there with ever so much money in your hand, i would never part
with your bond.

nora. tell me what purpose you mean to put it to.

krogstad. i shall only preserve it--keep it in my possession. no one who
is not concerned in the matter shall have the slightest hint of it. so
that if the thought of it has driven you to any desperate resolution--

nora. it has.

krogstad. if you had it in your mind to run away from your home--

nora. i had.

krogstad. or even something worse--

nora. how could you know that?

krogstad. give up the idea.

nora. how did you know i had thought of that?

krogstad. most of us think of that at first. i did, too--but i hadn't
the courage.

nora (faintly). no more had i.

krogstad (in a tone of relief). no, that's it, isn't it--you hadn't the
courage either?

nora. no, i haven't--i haven't.

krogstad. besides, it would have been a great piece of folly. once the
first storm at home is over--. i have a letter for your husband in my
pocket.

nora. telling him everything?

krogstad. in as lenient a manner as i possibly could.

nora (quickly). he mustn't get the letter. tear it up. i will find some
means of getting money.

krogstad. excuse me, mrs. helmer, but i think i told you just now--

nora. i am not speaking of what i owe you. tell me what sum you are
asking my husband for, and i will get the money.

krogstad. i am not asking your husband for a penny.

nora. what do you want, then?

krogstad. i will tell you. i want to rehabilitate myself, mrs. helmer; i
want to get on; and in that your husband must help me. for the last year
and a half i have not had a hand in anything dishonourable, amid all
that time i have been struggling in most restricted circumstances. i was
content to work my way up step by step. now i am turned out, and i am
not going to be satisfied with merely being taken into favour again.
i want to get on, i tell you. i want to get into the bank again, in a
higher position. your husband must make a place for me--

nora. that he will never do!

krogstad. he will; i know him; he dare not protest. and as soon as i am
in there again with him, then you will see! within a year i shall be the
manager's right hand. it will be nils krogstad and not torvald helmer
who manages the bank.

nora. that's a thing you will never see!

krogstad. do you mean that you will--?

nora. i have courage enough for it now.

krogstad. oh, you can't frighten me. a fine, spoilt lady like you--

nora. you will see, you will see.

krogstad. under the ice, perhaps? down into the cold, coal-black water?
and then, in the spring, to float up to the surface, all horrible and
unrecognisable, with your hair fallen out--

nora. you can't frighten me.

krogstad. nor you me. people don't do such things, mrs. helmer. besides,
what use would it be? i should have him completely in my power all the
same.

nora. afterwards? when i am no longer--

krogstad. have you forgotten that it is i who have the keeping of your
reputation? (nora stands speechlessly looking at him.) well, now, i have
warned you. do not do anything foolish. when helmer has had my letter,
i shall expect a message from him. and be sure you remember that it is
your husband himself who has forced me into such ways as this again. i
will never forgive him for that. goodbye, mrs. helmer. (exit through the
hall.)

nora (goes to the hall door, opens it slightly and listens.) he is
going. he is not putting the letter in the box. oh no, no! that's
impossible! (opens the door by degrees.) what is that? he is standing
outside. he is not going downstairs. is he hesitating? can he--? (a
letter drops into the box; then krogstad's footsteps are heard, until
they die away as he goes downstairs. nora utters a stifled cry, and runs
across the room to the table by the sofa. a short pause.)

nora. in the letter-box. (steals across to the hall door.) there it
lies--torvald, torvald, there is no hope for us now!

(mrs. linde comes in from the room on the left, carrying the dress.)

mrs. linde. there, i can't see anything more to mend now. would you like
to try it on--?

nora (in a hoarse whisper). christine, come here.

mrs. linde (throwing the dress down on the sofa). what is the matter
with you? you look so agitated!

nora. come here. do you see that letter? there, look--you can see it
through the glass in the letter-box.

mrs. linde. yes, i see it.

nora. that letter is from krogstad.

mrs. linde. nora--it was krogstad who lent you the money!

nora. yes, and now torvald will know all about it.

mrs. linde. believe me, nora, that's the best thing for both of you.

nora. you don't know all. i forged a name.

mrs. linde. good heavens--!

nora. i only want to say this to you, christine--you must be my witness.

mrs. linde. your witness? what do you mean? what am i to--?

nora. if i should go out of my mind--and it might easily happen--

mrs. linde. nora!

nora. or if anything else should happen to me--anything, for instance,
that might prevent my being here--

mrs. linde. nora! nora! you are quite out of your mind.

nora. and if it should happen that there were some one who wanted to
take all the responsibility, all the blame, you understand--

mrs. linde. yes, yes--but how can you suppose--?

nora. then you must be my witness, that it is not true, christine. i am
not out of my mind at all; i am in my right senses now, and i tell you
no one else has known anything about it; i, and i alone, did the whole
thing. remember that.

mrs. linde. i will, indeed. but i don't understand all this.

nora. how should you understand it? a wonderful thing is going to
happen!

mrs. linde. a wonderful thing?

nora. yes, a wonderful thing!--but it is so terrible, christine; it
mustn't happen, not for all the world.

mrs. linde. i will go at once and see krogstad.

nora. don't go to him; he will do you some harm.

mrs. linde. there was a time when he would gladly do anything for my
sake.

nora. he?

mrs. linde. where does he live?

nora. how should i know--? yes (feeling in her pocket), here is his
card. but the letter, the letter--!

helmer (calls from his room, knocking at the door). nora! nora (cries
out anxiously). oh, what's that? what do you want?

helmer. don't be so frightened. we are not coming in; you have locked
the door. are you trying on your dress?

nora. yes, that's it. i look so nice, torvald.

mrs. linde (who has read the card). i see he lives at the corner here.

nora. yes, but it's no use. it is hopeless. the letter is lying there in
the box.

mrs. linde. and your husband keeps the key?

nora. yes, always.

mrs. linde. krogstad must ask for his letter back unread, he must find
some pretence--

nora. but it is just at this time that torvald generally--

mrs. linde. you must delay him. go in to him in the meantime. i will
come back as soon as i can. (she goes out hurriedly through the hall
door.)

nora (goes to helmer's door, opens it and peeps in). torvald!

helmer (from the inner room). well? may i venture at last to come into
my own room again? come along, rank, now you will see-- (halting in the
doorway.) but what is this?

nora. what is what, dear?

helmer. rank led me to expect a splendid transformation.

rank (in the doorway). i understood so, but evidently i was mistaken.

nora. yes, nobody is to have the chance of admiring me in my dress until
tomorrow.

helmer. but, my dear nora, you look so worn out. have you been
practising too much?

nora. no, i have not practised at all.

helmer. but you will need to--

nora. yes, indeed i shall, torvald. but i can't get on a bit without you
to help me; i have absolutely forgotten the whole thing.

helmer. oh, we will soon work it up again.

nora. yes, help me, torvald. promise that you will! i am so nervous
about it--all the people--. you must give yourself up to me entirely
this evening. not the tiniest bit of business--you mustn't even take a
pen in your hand. will you promise, torvald dear?

helmer. i promise. this evening i will be wholly and absolutely at your
service, you helpless little mortal. ah, by the way, first of all i will
just--(goes towards the hall door.)

nora. what are you going to do there?

helmer. only see if any letters have come.

nora. no, no! don't do that, torvald!

helmer. why not?

nora. torvald, please don't. there is nothing there.

helmer. well, let me look. (turns to go to the letter-box. nora, at
the piano, plays the first bars of the tarantella. helmer stops in the
doorway.) aha!

nora. i can't dance tomorrow if i don't practise with you.

helmer (going up to her). are you really so afraid of it, dear?

nora. yes, so dreadfully afraid of it. let me practise at once; there
is time now, before we go to dinner. sit down and play for me, torvald
dear; criticise me, and correct me as you play.

helmer. with great pleasure, if you wish me to. (sits down at the
piano.)

nora (takes out of the box a tambourine and a long variegated shawl. she
hastily drapes the shawl round her. then she springs to the front of the
stage and calls out). now play for me! i am going to dance!

(helmer plays and nora dances. rank stands by the piano behind helmer,
and looks on.)

helmer (as he plays). slower, slower!

nora. i can't do it any other way.

helmer. not so violently, nora!

nora. this is the way.

helmer (stops playing). no, no--that is not a bit right.

nora (laughing and swinging the tambourine). didn't i tell you so?

rank. let me play for her.

helmer (getting up). yes, do. i can correct her better then.

(rank sits down at the piano and plays. nora dances more and more
wildly. helmer has taken up a position beside the stove, and during her
dance gives her frequent instructions. she does not seem to hear him;
her hair comes down and falls over her shoulders; she pays no attention
to it, but goes on dancing. enter mrs. linde.)

mrs. linde (standing as if spell-bound in the doorway). oh!--

nora (as she dances). such fun, christine!

helmer. my dear darling nora, you are dancing as if your life depended
on it.

nora. so it does.

helmer. stop, rank; this is sheer madness. stop, i tell you! (rank stops
playing, and nora suddenly stands still. helmer goes up to her.) i could
never have believed it. you have forgotten everything i taught you.

nora (throwing away the tambourine). there, you see.

helmer. you will want a lot of coaching.

nora. yes, you see how much i need it. you must coach me up to the last
minute. promise me that, torvald!

helmer. you can depend on me.

nora. you must not think of anything but me, either today or tomorrow;
you mustn't open a single letter--not even open the letter-box--

helmer. ah, you are still afraid of that fellow--

nora. yes, indeed i am.

helmer. nora, i can tell from your looks that there is a letter from him
lying there.

nora. i don't know; i think there is; but you must not read anything
of that kind now. nothing horrid must come between us until this is all
over.

rank (whispers to helmer). you mustn't contradict her.

helmer (taking her in his arms). the child shall have her way. but
tomorrow night, after you have danced--

nora. then you will be free. (the maid appears in the doorway to the
right.)

maid. dinner is served, ma'am.

nora. we will have champagne, helen.

maid. very good, ma'am. [exit.

helmer. hullo!--are we going to have a banquet?

nora. yes, a champagne banquet until the small hours. (calls out.) and a
few macaroons, helen--lots, just for once!

helmer. come, come, don't be so wild and nervous. be my own little
skylark, as you used.

nora. yes, dear, i will. but go in now and you too, doctor rank.
christine, you must help me to do up my hair.

rank (whispers to helmer as they go out). i suppose there is
nothing--she is not expecting anything?

helmer. far from it, my dear fellow; it is simply nothing more than this
childish nervousness i was telling you of. (they go into the right-hand
room.)

nora. well!

mrs. linde. gone out of town.

nora. i could tell from your face.

mrs. linde. he is coming home tomorrow evening. i wrote a note for him.

nora. you should have let it alone; you must prevent nothing. after all,
it is splendid to be waiting for a wonderful thing to happen.

mrs. linde. what is it that you are waiting for?

nora. oh, you wouldn't understand. go in to them, i will come in a
moment. (mrs. linde goes into the dining-room. nora stands still for a
little while, as if to compose herself. then she looks at her watch.)
five o'clock. seven hours until midnight; and then four-and-twenty hours
until the next midnight. then the tarantella will be over. twenty-four
and seven? thirty-one hours to live.

helmer (from the doorway on the right). where's my little skylark?

nora (going to him with her arms outstretched). here she is!




act iii

(the same scene.--the table has been placed in the middle of the stage,
with chairs around it. a lamp is burning on the table. the door into the
hall stands open. dance music is heard in the room above. mrs. linde is
sitting at the table idly turning over the leaves of a book; she tries
to read, but does not seem able to collect her thoughts. every now and
then she listens intently for a sound at the outer door.)

mrs. linde (looking at her watch). not yet--and the time is nearly up.
if only he does not--. (listens again.) ah, there he is. (goes into the
hall and opens the outer door carefully. light footsteps are heard on
the stairs. she whispers.) come in. there is no one here.

krogstad (in the doorway). i found a note from you at home. what does
this mean?

mrs. linde. it is absolutely necessary that i should have a talk with
you.

krogstad. really? and is it absolutely necessary that it should be here?

mrs. linde. it is impossible where i live; there is no private entrance
to my rooms. come in; we are quite alone. the maid is asleep, and the
helmers are at the dance upstairs.

krogstad (coming into the room). are the helmers really at a dance
tonight?

mrs. linde. yes, why not?

krogstad. certainly--why not?

mrs. linde. now, nils, let us have a talk.

krogstad. can we two have anything to talk about?

mrs. linde. we have a great deal to talk about.

krogstad. i shouldn't have thought so.

mrs. linde. no, you have never properly understood me.

krogstad. was there anything else to understand except what was obvious
to all the world--a heartless woman jilts a man when a more lucrative
chance turns up?

mrs. linde. do you believe i am as absolutely heartless as all that? and
do you believe that i did it with a light heart?

krogstad. didn't you?

mrs. linde. nils, did you really think that?

krogstad. if it were as you say, why did you write to me as you did at
the time?

mrs. linde. i could do nothing else. as i had to break with you, it was
my duty also to put an end to all that you felt for me.

krogstad (wringing his hands). so that was it. and all this--only for
the sake of money!

mrs. linde. you must not forget that i had a helpless mother and two
little brothers. we couldn't wait for you, nils; your prospects seemed
hopeless then.

krogstad. that may be so, but you had no right to throw me over for
anyone else's sake.

mrs. linde. indeed i don't know. many a time did i ask myself if i had
the right to do it.

krogstad (more gently). when i lost you, it was as if all the solid
ground went from under my feet. look at me now--i am a shipwrecked man
clinging to a bit of wreckage.

mrs. linde. but help may be near.

krogstad. it was near; but then you came and stood in my way.

mrs. linde. unintentionally, nils. it was only today that i learned it
was your place i was going to take in the bank.

krogstad. i believe you, if you say so. but now that you know it, are
you not going to give it up to me?

mrs. linde. no, because that would not benefit you in the least.

krogstad. oh, benefit, benefit--i would have done it whether or no.

mrs. linde. i have learned to act prudently. life, and hard, bitter
necessity have taught me that.

krogstad. and life has taught me not to believe in fine speeches.

mrs. linde. then life has taught you something very reasonable. but
deeds you must believe in?

krogstad. what do you mean by that?

mrs. linde. you said you were like a shipwrecked man clinging to some
wreckage.

krogstad. i had good reason to say so.

mrs. linde. well, i am like a shipwrecked woman clinging to some
wreckage--no one to mourn for, no one to care for.

krogstad. it was your own choice.

mrs. linde. there was no other choice--then.

krogstad. well, what now?

mrs. linde. nils, how would it be if we two shipwrecked people could
join forces?

krogstad. what are you saying?

mrs. linde. two on the same piece of wreckage would stand a better
chance than each on their own.

krogstad. christine i...

mrs. linde. what do you suppose brought me to town?

krogstad. do you mean that you gave me a thought?

mrs. linde. i could not endure life without work. all my life, as long
as i can remember, i have worked, and it has been my greatest and
only pleasure. but now i am quite alone in the world--my life is so
dreadfully empty and i feel so forsaken. there is not the least pleasure
in working for one's self. nils, give me someone and something to work
for.

krogstad. i don't trust that. it is nothing but a woman's overstrained
sense of generosity that prompts you to make such an offer of yourself.

mrs. linde. have you ever noticed anything of the sort in me?

krogstad. could you really do it? tell me--do you know all about my past
life?

mrs. linde. yes.

krogstad. and do you know what they think of me here?

mrs. linde. you seemed to me to imply that with me you might have been
quite another man.

krogstad. i am certain of it.

mrs. linde. is it too late now?

krogstad. christine, are you saying this deliberately? yes, i am sure
you are. i see it in your face. have you really the courage, then--?

mrs. linde. i want to be a mother to someone, and your children need
a mother. we two need each other. nils, i have faith in your real
character--i can dare anything together with you.

krogstad (grasps her hands). thanks, thanks, christine! now i shall find
a way to clear myself in the eyes of the world. ah, but i forgot--

mrs. linde (listening). hush! the tarantella! go, go!

krogstad. why? what is it?

mrs. linde. do you hear them up there? when that is over, we may expect
them back.

krogstad. yes, yes--i will go. but it is all no use. of course you are
not aware what steps i have taken in the matter of the helmers.

mrs. linde. yes, i know all about that.

krogstad. and in spite of that have you the courage to--?

mrs. linde. i understand very well to what lengths a man like you might
be driven by despair.

krogstad. if i could only undo what i have done!

mrs. linde. you cannot. your letter is lying in the letter-box now.

krogstad. are you sure of that?

mrs. linde. quite sure, but--

krogstad (with a searching look at her). is that what it all
means?--that you want to save your friend at any cost? tell me frankly.
is that it?

mrs. linde. nils, a woman who has once sold herself for another's sake,
doesn't do it a second time.

krogstad. i will ask for my letter back.

mrs. linde. no, no.

krogstad. yes, of course i will. i will wait here until helmer comes; i
will tell him he must give me my letter back--that it only concerns my
dismissal--that he is not to read it--

mrs. linde. no, nils, you must not recall your letter.

krogstad. but, tell me, wasn't it for that very purpose that you asked
me to meet you here?

mrs. linde. in my first moment of fright, it was. but twenty-four hours
have elapsed since then, and in that time i have witnessed incredible
things in this house. helmer must know all about it. this unhappy secret
must be disclosed; they must have a complete understanding between them,
which is impossible with all this concealment and falsehood going on.

krogstad. very well, if you will take the responsibility. but there is
one thing i can do in any case, and i shall do it at once.

mrs. linde (listening). you must be quick and go! the dance is over; we
are not safe a moment longer.

krogstad. i will wait for you below.

mrs. linde. yes, do. you must see me back to my door...

krogstad. i have never had such an amazing piece of good fortune in my
life! (goes out through the outer door. the door between the room and
the hall remains open.)

mrs. linde (tidying up the room and laying her hat and cloak ready).
what a difference! what a difference! someone to work for and live
for--a home to bring comfort into. that i will do, indeed. i wish they
would be quick and come--(listens.) ah, there they are now. i must put
on my things. (takes up her hat and cloak. helmer's and nora's voices
are heard outside; a key is turned, and helmer brings nora almost by
force into the hall. she is in an italian costume with a large black
shawl around her; he is in evening dress, and a black domino which is
flying open.)

nora (hanging back in the doorway, and struggling with him). no, no,
no!--don't take me in. i want to go upstairs again; i don't want to
leave so early.

helmer. but, my dearest nora--

nora. please, torvald dear--please, please--only an hour more.

helmer. not a single minute, my sweet nora. you know that was our
agreement. come along into the room; you are catching cold standing
there. (he brings her gently into the room, in spite of her resistance.)

mrs. linde. good evening.

nora. christine!

helmer. you here, so late, mrs. linde?

mrs. linde. yes, you must excuse me; i was so anxious to see nora in her
dress.

nora. have you been sitting here waiting for me?

mrs. linde. yes, unfortunately i came too late, you had already gone
upstairs; and i thought i couldn't go away again without having seen
you.

helmer (taking off nora's shawl). yes, take a good look at her. i think
she is worth looking at. isn't she charming, mrs. linde?

mrs. linde. yes, indeed she is.

helmer. doesn't she look remarkably pretty? everyone thought so at the
dance. but she is terribly self-willed, this sweet little person. what
are we to do with her? you will hardly believe that i had almost to
bring her away by force.

nora. torvald, you will repent not having let me stay, even if it were
only for half an hour.

helmer. listen to her, mrs. linde! she had danced her tarantella, and
it had been a tremendous success, as it deserved--although possibly the
performance was a trifle too realistic--a little more so, i mean, than
was strictly compatible with the limitations of art. but never mind
about that! the chief thing is, she had made a success--she had made
a tremendous success. do you think i was going to let her remain there
after that, and spoil the effect? no, indeed! i took my charming little
capri maiden--my capricious little capri maiden, i should say--on my
arm; took one quick turn round the room; a curtsey on either side, and,
as they say in novels, the beautiful apparition disappeared. an exit
ought always to be effective, mrs. linde; but that is what i cannot make
nora understand. pooh! this room is hot. (throws his domino on a chair,
and opens the door of his room.) hullo! it's all dark in here. oh, of
course--excuse me--. (he goes in, and lights some candles.)

nora (in a hurried and breathless whisper). well?

mrs. linde (in a low voice). i have had a talk with him.

nora. yes, and--

mrs. linde. nora, you must tell your husband all about it.

nora (in an expressionless voice). i knew it.

mrs. linde. you have nothing to be afraid of as far as krogstad is
concerned; but you must tell him.

nora. i won't tell him.

mrs. linde. then the letter will.

nora. thank you, christine. now i know what i must do. hush--!

helmer (coming in again). well, mrs. linde, have you admired her?

mrs. linde. yes, and now i will say goodnight.

helmer. what, already? is this yours, this knitting?

mrs. linde (taking it). yes, thank you, i had very nearly forgotten it.

helmer. so you knit?

mrs. linde. of course.

helmer. do you know, you ought to embroider.

mrs. linde. really? why?

helmer. yes, it's far more becoming. let me show you. you hold
the embroidery thus in your left hand, and use the needle with the
right--like this--with a long, easy sweep. do you see?

mrs. linde. yes, perhaps--

helmer. but in the case of knitting--that can never be anything but
ungraceful; look here--the arms close together, the knitting-needles
going up and down--it has a sort of chinese effect--. that was really
excellent champagne they gave us.

mrs. linde. well,--goodnight, nora, and don't be self-willed any more.

helmer. that's right, mrs. linde.

mrs. linde. goodnight, mr. helmer.

helmer (accompanying her to the door). goodnight, goodnight. i hope you
will get home all right. i should be very happy to--but you haven't any
great distance to go. goodnight, goodnight. (she goes out; he shuts the
door after her, and comes in again.) ah!--at last we have got rid of
her. she is a frightful bore, that woman.

nora. aren't you very tired, torvald?

helmer. no, not in the least.

nora. nor sleepy?

helmer. not a bit. on the contrary, i feel extraordinarily lively. and
you?--you really look both tired and sleepy.

nora. yes, i am very tired. i want to go to sleep at once.

helmer. there, you see it was quite right of me not to let you stay
there any longer.

nora. everything you do is quite right, torvald.

helmer (kissing her on the forehead). now my little skylark is speaking
reasonably. did you notice what good spirits rank was in this evening?

nora. really? was he? i didn't speak to him at all.

helmer. and i very little, but i have not for a long time seen him in
such good form. (looks for a while at her and then goes nearer to her.)
it is delightful to be at home by ourselves again, to be all alone with
you--you fascinating, charming little darling!

nora. don't look at me like that, torvald.

helmer. why shouldn't i look at my dearest treasure?--at all the beauty
that is mine, all my very own?

nora (going to the other side of the table). you mustn't say things like
that to me tonight.

helmer (following her). you have still got the tarantella in your blood,
i see. and it makes you more captivating than ever. listen--the guests
are beginning to go now. (in a lower voice.) nora--soon the whole house
will be quiet.

nora. yes, i hope so.

helmer. yes, my own darling nora. do you know, when i am out at a party
with you like this, why i speak so little to you, keep away from you,
and only send a stolen glance in your direction now and then?--do you
know why i do that? it is because i make believe to myself that we are
secretly in love, and you are my secretly promised bride, and that no
one suspects there is anything between us.

nora. yes, yes--i know very well your thoughts are with me all the time.

helmer. and when we are leaving, and i am putting the shawl over your
beautiful young shoulders--on your lovely neck--then i imagine that you
are my young bride and that we have just come from the wedding, and i am
bringing you for the first time into our home--to be alone with you for
the first time--quite alone with my shy little darling! all this evening
i have longed for nothing but you. when i watched the seductive figures
of the tarantella, my blood was on fire; i could endure it no longer,
and that was why i brought you down so early--

nora. go away, torvald! you must let me go. i won't--

helmer. what's that? you're joking, my little nora! you won't--you
won't? am i not your husband--? (a knock is heard at the outer door.)

nora (starting). did you hear--?

helmer (going into the hall). who is it?

rank (outside). it is i. may i come in for a moment?

helmer (in a fretful whisper). oh, what does he want now? (aloud.) wait
a minute! (unlocks the door.) come, that's kind of you not to pass by
our door.

rank. i thought i heard your voice, and felt as if i should like to look
in. (with a swift glance round.) ah, yes!--these dear familiar rooms.
you are very happy and cosy in here, you two.

helmer. it seems to me that you looked after yourself pretty well
upstairs too.

rank. excellently. why shouldn't i? why shouldn't one enjoy everything
in this world?--at any rate as much as one can, and as long as one can.
the wine was capital--

helmer. especially the champagne.

rank. so you noticed that too? it is almost incredible how much i
managed to put away!

nora. torvald drank a great deal of champagne tonight too.

rank. did he?

nora. yes, and he is always in such good spirits afterwards.

rank. well, why should one not enjoy a merry evening after a well-spent
day?

helmer. well spent? i am afraid i can't take credit for that.

rank (clapping him on the back). but i can, you know!

nora. doctor rank, you must have been occupied with some scientific
investigation today.

rank. exactly.

helmer. just listen!--little nora talking about scientific
investigations!

nora. and may i congratulate you on the result?

rank. indeed you may.

nora. was it favourable, then?

rank. the best possible, for both doctor and patient--certainty.

nora (quickly and searchingly). certainty?

rank. absolute certainty. so wasn't i entitled to make a merry evening
of it after that?

nora. yes, you certainly were, doctor rank. helmer. i think so too, so
long as you don't have to pay for it in the morning.

rank. oh well, one can't have anything in this life without paying for
it.

nora. doctor rank--are you fond of fancy-dress balls?

rank. yes, if there is a fine lot of pretty costumes.

nora. tell me--what shall we two wear at the next?

helmer. little featherbrain!--are you thinking of the next already?

rank. we two? yes, i can tell you. you shall go as a good fairy--

helmer. yes, but what do you suggest as an appropriate costume for that?

rank. let your wife go dressed just as she is in everyday life.

helmer. that was really very prettily turned. but can't you tell us what
you will be?

rank. yes, my dear friend, i have quite made up my mind about that.

helmer. well?

rank. at the next fancy-dress ball i shall be invisible.

helmer. that's a good joke!

rank. there is a big black hat--have you never heard of hats that make
you invisible? if you put one on, no one can see you.

helmer (suppressing a smile). yes, you are quite right.

rank. but i am clean forgetting what i came for. helmer, give me a
cigar--one of the dark havanas.

helmer. with the greatest pleasure. (offers him his case.)

rank (takes a cigar and cuts off the end). thanks.

nora (striking a match). let me give you a light.

rank. thank you. (she holds the match for him to light his cigar.) and
now goodbye!

helmer. goodbye, goodbye, dear old man!

nora. sleep well, doctor rank.

rank. thank you for that wish.

nora. wish me the same.

rank. you? well, if you want me to sleep well! and thanks for the light.
(he nods to them both and goes out.)

helmer (in a subdued voice). he has drunk more than he ought.

nora (absently). maybe. (helmer takes a bunch of keys out of his pocket
and goes into the hall.) torvald! what are you going to do there?

helmer. emptying the letter-box; it is quite full; there will be no room
to put the newspaper in tomorrow morning.

nora. are you going to work tonight?

helmer. you know quite well i'm not. what is this? someone has been at
the lock.

nora. at the lock--?

helmer. yes, someone has. what can it mean? i should never have thought
the maid--. here is a broken hairpin. nora, it is one of yours.

nora (quickly). then it must have been the children--

helmer. then you must get them out of those ways. there, at last i have
got it open. (takes out the contents of the letter-box, and calls to the
kitchen.) helen!--helen, put out the light over the front door. (goes
back into the room and shuts the door into the hall. he holds out his
hand full of letters.) look at that--look what a heap of them there
are. (turning them over.) what on earth is that?

nora (at the window). the letter--no! torvald, no!

helmer. two cards--of rank's.

nora. of doctor rank's?

helmer (looking at them). doctor rank. they were on the top. he must
have put them in when he went out.

nora. is there anything written on them?

helmer. there is a black cross over the name. look there--what an
uncomfortable idea! it looks as if he were announcing his own death.

nora. it is just what he is doing.

helmer. what? do you know anything about it? has he said anything to
you?

nora. yes. he told me that when the cards came it would be his
leave-taking from us. he means to shut himself up and die.

helmer. my poor old friend! certainly i knew we should not have him very
long with us. but so soon! and so he hides himself away like a wounded
animal.

nora. if it has to happen, it is best it should be without a word--don't
you think so, torvald?

helmer (walking up and down). he had so grown into our lives. i can't
think of him as having gone out of them. he, with his sufferings and his
loneliness, was like a cloudy background to our sunlit happiness. well,
perhaps it is best so. for him, anyway. (standing still.) and perhaps
for us too, nora. we two are thrown quite upon each other now. (puts his
arms round her.) my darling wife, i don't feel as if i could hold you
tight enough. do you know, nora, i have often wished that you might be
threatened by some great danger, so that i might risk my life's blood,
and everything, for your sake.

nora (disengages herself, and says firmly and decidedly). now you must
read your letters, torvald.

helmer. no, no; not tonight. i want to be with you, my darling wife.

nora. with the thought of your friend's death--

helmer. you are right, it has affected us both. something ugly has come
between us--the thought of the horrors of death. we must try and rid our
minds of that. until then--we will each go to our own room.

nora (hanging on his neck). goodnight, torvald--goodnight!

helmer (kissing her on the forehead). goodnight, my little singing-bird.
sleep sound, nora. now i will read my letters through. (he takes his
letters and goes into his room, shutting the door after him.)

nora (gropes distractedly about, seizes helmer's domino, throws it round
her, while she says in quick, hoarse, spasmodic whispers). never to see
him again. never! never! (puts her shawl over her head.) never to see
my children again either--never again. never! never!--ah! the icy, black
water--the unfathomable depths--if only it were over! he has got it
now--now he is reading it. goodbye, torvald and my children! (she is
about to rush out through the hall, when helmer opens his door hurriedly
and stands with an open letter in his hand.)

helmer. nora!

nora. ah!--

helmer. what is this? do you know what is in this letter?

nora. yes, i know. let me go! let me get out!

helmer (holding her back). where are you going?

nora (trying to get free). you shan't save me, torvald!

helmer (reeling). true? is this true, that i read here? horrible! no,
no--it is impossible that it can be true.

nora. it is true. i have loved you above everything else in the world.

helmer. oh, don't let us have any silly excuses.

nora (taking a step towards him). torvald--!

helmer. miserable creature--what have you done?

nora. let me go. you shall not suffer for my sake. you shall not take it
upon yourself.

helmer. no tragic airs, please. (locks the hall door.) here you shall
stay and give me an explanation. do you understand what you have done?
answer me! do you understand what you have done?

nora (looks steadily at him and says with a growing look of coldness in
her face). yes, now i am beginning to understand thoroughly.

helmer (walking about the room). what a horrible awakening! all these
eight years--she who was my joy and pride--a hypocrite, a liar--worse,
worse--a criminal! the unutterable ugliness of it all!--for shame! for
shame! (nora is silent and looks steadily at him. he stops in front of
her.) i ought to have suspected that something of the sort would happen.
i ought to have foreseen it. all your father's want of principle--be
silent!--all your father's want of principle has come out in you. no
religion, no morality, no sense of duty--. how i am punished for having
winked at what he did! i did it for your sake, and this is how you repay
me.

nora. yes, that's just it.

helmer. now you have destroyed all my happiness. you have ruined all my
future. it is horrible to think of! i am in the power of an unscrupulous
man; he can do what he likes with me, ask anything he likes of me, give
me any orders he pleases--i dare not refuse. and i must sink to such
miserable depths because of a thoughtless woman!

nora. when i am out of the way, you will be free.

helmer. no fine speeches, please. your father had always plenty of those
ready, too. what good would it be to me if you were out of the way, as
you say? not the slightest. he can make the affair known everywhere; and
if he does, i may be falsely suspected of having been a party to your
criminal action. very likely people will think i was behind it all--that
it was i who prompted you! and i have to thank you for all this--you
whom i have cherished during the whole of our married life. do you
understand now what it is you have done for me?

nora (coldly and quietly). yes.

helmer. it is so incredible that i can't take it in. but we must come to
some understanding. take off that shawl. take it off, i tell you. i must
try and appease him some way or another. the matter must be hushed up at
any cost. and as for you and me, it must appear as if everything between
us were just as before--but naturally only in the eyes of the world. you
will still remain in my house, that is a matter of course. but i shall
not allow you to bring up the children; i dare not trust them to you.
to think that i should be obliged to say so to one whom i have loved
so dearly, and whom i still--. no, that is all over. from this moment
happiness is not the question; all that concerns us is to save the
remains, the fragments, the appearance--

(a ring is heard at the front-door bell.)

helmer (with a start). what is that? so late! can the worst--? can he--?
hide yourself, nora. say you are ill.

(nora stands motionless. helmer goes and unlocks the hall door.)

maid (half-dressed, comes to the door). a letter for the mistress.

helmer. give it to me. (takes the letter, and shuts the door.) yes, it
is from him. you shall not have it; i will read it myself.

nora. yes, read it.

helmer (standing by the lamp). i scarcely have the courage to do it. it
may mean ruin for both of us. no, i must know. (tears open the letter,
runs his eye over a few lines, looks at a paper enclosed, and gives a
shout of joy.) nora! (she looks at him questioningly.) nora!--no, i must
read it once again--. yes, it is true! i am saved! nora, i am saved!

nora. and i?

helmer. you too, of course; we are both saved, both you and i. look, he
sends you your bond back. he says he regrets and repents--that a happy
change in his life--never mind what he says! we are saved, nora! no one
can do anything to you. oh, nora, nora!--no, first i must destroy these
hateful things. let me see--. (takes a look at the bond.) no, no, i
won't look at it. the whole thing shall be nothing but a bad dream to
me. (tears up the bond and both letters, throws them all into the stove,
and watches them burn.) there--now it doesn't exist any longer. he says
that since christmas eve you--. these must have been three dreadful days
for you, nora.

nora. i have fought a hard fight these three days.

helmer. and suffered agonies, and seen no way out but--. no, we won't
call any of the horrors to mind. we will only shout with joy, and keep
saying, "it's all over! it's all over!" listen to me, nora. you don't
seem to realise that it is all over. what is this?--such a cold, set
face! my poor little nora, i quite understand; you don't feel as if you
could believe that i have forgiven you. but it is true, nora, i swear
it; i have forgiven you everything. i know that what you did, you did
out of love for me.

nora. that is true.

helmer. you have loved me as a wife ought to love her husband. only you
had not sufficient knowledge to judge of the means you used. but do you
suppose you are any the less dear to me, because you don't understand
how to act on your own responsibility? no, no; only lean on me; i
will advise you and direct you. i should not be a man if this womanly
helplessness did not just give you a double attractiveness in my eyes.
you must not think anymore about the hard things i said in my first
moment of consternation, when i thought everything was going to
overwhelm me. i have forgiven you, nora; i swear to you i have forgiven
you.

nora. thank you for your forgiveness. (she goes out through the door to
the right.)

helmer. no, don't go--. (looks in.) what are you doing in there?

nora (from within). taking off my fancy dress.

helmer (standing at the open door). yes, do. try and calm yourself,
and make your mind easy again, my frightened little singing-bird. be at
rest, and feel secure; i have broad wings to shelter you under. (walks
up and down by the door.) how warm and cosy our home is, nora. here is
shelter for you; here i will protect you like a hunted dove that i
have saved from a hawk's claws; i will bring peace to your poor beating
heart. it will come, little by little, nora, believe me. tomorrow
morning you will look upon it all quite differently; soon everything
will be just as it was before. very soon you won't need me to assure you
that i have forgiven you; you will yourself feel the certainty that i
have done so. can you suppose i should ever think of such a thing as
repudiating you, or even reproaching you? you have no idea what a true
man's heart is like, nora. there is something so indescribably sweet
and satisfying, to a man, in the knowledge that he has forgiven his
wife--forgiven her freely, and with all his heart. it seems as if that
had made her, as it were, doubly his own; he has given her a new life,
so to speak; and she has in a way become both wife and child to him. so
you shall be for me after this, my little scared, helpless darling. have
no anxiety about anything, nora; only be frank and open with me, and i
will serve as will and conscience both to you--. what is this? not gone
to bed? have you changed your things?

nora (in everyday dress). yes, torvald, i have changed my things now.

helmer. but what for?--so late as this.

nora. i shall not sleep tonight.

helmer. but, my dear nora--

nora (looking at her watch). it is not so very late. sit down here,
torvald. you and i have much to say to one another. (she sits down at
one side of the table.)

helmer. nora--what is this?--this cold, set face?

nora. sit down. it will take some time; i have a lot to talk over with
you.

helmer (sits down at the opposite side of the table). you alarm me,
nora!--and i don't understand you.

nora. no, that is just it. you don't understand me, and i have never
understood you either--before tonight. no, you mustn't interrupt me.
you must simply listen to what i say. torvald, this is a settling of
accounts.

helmer. what do you mean by that?

nora (after a short silence). isn't there one thing that strikes you as
strange in our sitting here like this?

helmer. what is that?

nora. we have been married now eight years. does it not occur to you
that this is the first time we two, you and i, husband and wife, have
had a serious conversation?

helmer. what do you mean by serious?

nora. in all these eight years--longer than that--from the very
beginning of our acquaintance, we have never exchanged a word on any
serious subject.

helmer. was it likely that i would be continually and forever telling
you about worries that you could not help me to bear?

nora. i am not speaking about business matters. i say that we have never
sat down in earnest together to try and get at the bottom of anything.

helmer. but, dearest nora, would it have been any good to you?

nora. that is just it; you have never understood me. i have been greatly
wronged, torvald--first by papa and then by you.

helmer. what! by us two--by us two, who have loved you better than
anyone else in the world?

nora (shaking her head). you have never loved me. you have only thought
it pleasant to be in love with me.

helmer. nora, what do i hear you saying?

nora. it is perfectly true, torvald. when i was at home with papa, he
told me his opinion about everything, and so i had the same opinions;
and if i differed from him i concealed the fact, because he would not
have liked it. he called me his doll-child, and he played with me just
as i used to play with my dolls. and when i came to live with you--

helmer. what sort of an expression is that to use about our marriage?

nora (undisturbed). i mean that i was simply transferred from papa's
hands into yours. you arranged everything according to your own taste,
and so i got the same tastes as you--or else i pretended to, i am really
not quite sure which--i think sometimes the one and sometimes the other.
when i look back on it, it seems to me as if i had been living here like
a poor woman--just from hand to mouth. i have existed merely to perform
tricks for you, torvald. but you would have it so. you and papa have
committed a great sin against me. it is your fault that i have made
nothing of my life.

helmer. how unreasonable and how ungrateful you are, nora! have you not
been happy here?

nora. no, i have never been happy. i thought i was, but it has never
really been so.

helmer. not--not happy!

nora. no, only merry. and you have always been so kind to me. but our
home has been nothing but a playroom. i have been your doll-wife, just
as at home i was papa's doll-child; and here the children have been
my dolls. i thought it great fun when you played with me, just as they
thought it great fun when i played with them. that is what our marriage
has been, torvald.

helmer. there is some truth in what you say--exaggerated and strained as
your view of it is. but for the future it shall be different. playtime
shall be over, and lesson-time shall begin.

nora. whose lessons? mine, or the children's?

helmer. both yours and the children's, my darling nora.

nora. alas, torvald, you are not the man to educate me into being a
proper wife for you.

helmer. and you can say that!

nora. and i--how am i fitted to bring up the children?

helmer. nora!

nora. didn't you say so yourself a little while ago--that you dare not
trust me to bring them up?

helmer. in a moment of anger! why do you pay any heed to that?

nora. indeed, you were perfectly right. i am not fit for the task.
there is another task i must undertake first. i must try and educate
myself--you are not the man to help me in that. i must do that for
myself. and that is why i am going to leave you now.

helmer (springing up). what do you say?

nora. i must stand quite alone, if i am to understand myself and
everything about me. it is for that reason that i cannot remain with you
any longer.

helmer. nora, nora!

nora. i am going away from here now, at once. i am sure christine will
take me in for the night--

helmer. you are out of your mind! i won't allow it! i forbid you!

nora. it is no use forbidding me anything any longer. i will take with
me what belongs to myself. i will take nothing from you, either now or
later.

helmer. what sort of madness is this!

nora. tomorrow i shall go home--i mean, to my old home. it will be
easiest for me to find something to do there.

helmer. you blind, foolish woman!

nora. i must try and get some sense, torvald.

helmer. to desert your home, your husband and your children! and you
don't consider what people will say!

nora. i cannot consider that at all. i only know that it is necessary
for me.

helmer. it's shocking. this is how you would neglect your most sacred
duties.

nora. what do you consider my most sacred duties?

helmer. do i need to tell you that? are they not your duties to your
husband and your children?

nora. i have other duties just as sacred.

helmer. that you have not. what duties could those be?

nora. duties to myself.

helmer. before all else, you are a wife and a mother.

nora. i don't believe that any longer. i believe that before all else i
am a reasonable human being, just as you are--or, at all events, that
i must try and become one. i know quite well, torvald, that most people
would think you right, and that views of that kind are to be found in
books; but i can no longer content myself with what most people say, or
with what is found in books. i must think over things for myself and get
to understand them.

helmer. can you not understand your place in your own home? have you not
a reliable guide in such matters as that?--have you no religion?

nora. i am afraid, torvald, i do not exactly know what religion is.

helmer. what are you saying?

nora. i know nothing but what the clergyman said, when i went to be
confirmed. he told us that religion was this, and that, and the other.
when i am away from all this, and am alone, i will look into that matter
too. i will see if what the clergyman said is true, or at all events if
it is true for me.

helmer. this is unheard of in a girl of your age! but if religion cannot
lead you aright, let me try and awaken your conscience. i suppose you
have some moral sense? or--answer me--am i to think you have none?

nora. i assure you, torvald, that is not an easy question to answer. i
really don't know. the thing perplexes me altogether. i only know that
you and i look at it in quite a different light. i am learning, too,
that the law is quite another thing from what i supposed; but i find it
impossible to convince myself that the law is right. according to it
a woman has no right to spare her old dying father, or to save her
husband's life. i can't believe that.

helmer. you talk like a child. you don't understand the conditions of
the world in which you live.

nora. no, i don't. but now i am going to try. i am going to see if i can
make out who is right, the world or i.

helmer. you are ill, nora; you are delirious; i almost think you are out
of your mind.

nora. i have never felt my mind so clear and certain as tonight.

helmer. and is it with a clear and certain mind that you forsake your
husband and your children?

nora. yes, it is.

helmer. then there is only one possible explanation.

nora. what is that?

helmer. you do not love me anymore.

nora. no, that is just it.

helmer. nora!--and you can say that?

nora. it gives me great pain, torvald, for you have always been so kind
to me, but i cannot help it. i do not love you any more.

helmer (regaining his composure). is that a clear and certain conviction
too?

nora. yes, absolutely clear and certain. that is the reason why i will
not stay here any longer.

helmer. and can you tell me what i have done to forfeit your love?

nora. yes, indeed i can. it was tonight, when the wonderful thing did
not happen; then i saw you were not the man i had thought you were.

helmer. explain yourself better. i don't understand you.

nora. i have waited so patiently for eight years; for, goodness knows,
i knew very well that wonderful things don't happen every day. then this
horrible misfortune came upon me; and then i felt quite certain that the
wonderful thing was going to happen at last. when krogstad's letter was
lying out there, never for a moment did i imagine that you would consent
to accept this man's conditions. i was so absolutely certain that you
would say to him: publish the thing to the whole world. and when that
was done--

helmer. yes, what then?--when i had exposed my wife to shame and
disgrace?

nora. when that was done, i was so absolutely certain, you would come
forward and take everything upon yourself, and say: i am the guilty one.

helmer. nora--!

nora. you mean that i would never have accepted such a sacrifice on your
part? no, of course not. but what would my assurances have been worth
against yours? that was the wonderful thing which i hoped for and
feared; and it was to prevent that, that i wanted to kill myself.

helmer. i would gladly work night and day for you, nora--bear sorrow and
want for your sake. but no man would sacrifice his honour for the one he
loves.

nora. it is a thing hundreds of thousands of women have done.

helmer. oh, you think and talk like a heedless child.

nora. maybe. but you neither think nor talk like the man i could bind
myself to. as soon as your fear was over--and it was not fear for what
threatened me, but for what might happen to you--when the whole thing
was past, as far as you were concerned it was exactly as if nothing at
all had happened. exactly as before, i was your little skylark, your
doll, which you would in future treat with doubly gentle care, because
it was so brittle and fragile. (getting up.) torvald--it was then
it dawned upon me that for eight years i had been living here with a
strange man, and had borne him three children--. oh, i can't bear to
think of it! i could tear myself into little bits!

helmer (sadly). i see, i see. an abyss has opened between us--there is
no denying it. but, nora, would it not be possible to fill it up?

nora. as i am now, i am no wife for you.

helmer. i have it in me to become a different man.

nora. perhaps--if your doll is taken away from you.

helmer. but to part!--to part from you! no, no, nora, i can't understand
that idea.

nora (going out to the right). that makes it all the more certain that
it must be done. (she comes back with her cloak and hat and a small bag
which she puts on a chair by the table.)

helmer. nora, nora, not now! wait until tomorrow.

nora (putting on her cloak). i cannot spend the night in a strange man's
room.

helmer. but can't we live here like brother and sister--?

nora (putting on her hat). you know very well that would not last long.
(puts the shawl round her.) goodbye, torvald. i won't see the little
ones. i know they are in better hands than mine. as i am now, i can be
of no use to them.

helmer. but some day, nora--some day?

nora. how can i tell? i have no idea what is going to become of me.

helmer. but you are my wife, whatever becomes of you.

nora. listen, torvald. i have heard that when a wife deserts her
husband's house, as i am doing now, he is legally freed from all
obligations towards her. in any case, i set you free from all your
obligations. you are not to feel yourself bound in the slightest way,
any more than i shall. there must be perfect freedom on both sides. see,
here is your ring back. give me mine.

helmer. that too?

nora. that too.

helmer. here it is.

nora. that's right. now it is all over. i have put the keys here.
the maids know all about everything in the house--better than i do.
tomorrow, after i have left her, christine will come here and pack up my
own things that i brought with me from home. i will have them sent after
me.

helmer. all over! all over!--nora, shall you never think of me again?

nora. i know i shall often think of you, the children, and this house.

helmer. may i write to you, nora?

nora. no--never. you must not do that.

helmer. but at least let me send you--

nora. nothing--nothing--

helmer. let me help you if you are in want.

nora. no. i can receive nothing from a stranger.

helmer. nora--can i never be anything more than a stranger to you?

nora (taking her bag). ah, torvald, the most wonderful thing of all
would have to happen.

helmer. tell me what that would be!

nora. both you and i would have to be so changed that--. oh, torvald, i
don't believe any longer in wonderful things happening.

helmer. but i will believe in it. tell me! so changed that--?

nora. that our life together would be a real wedlock. goodbye. (she goes
out through the hall.)

helmer (sinks down on a chair at the door and buries his face in his
hands). nora! nora! (looks round, and rises.) empty. she is gone. (a
hope flashes across his mind.) the most wonderful thing of all--?

(the sound of a door shutting is heard from below.)


<|EndOfText|>

introduction.


with _the master builder_--or _master builder solness_, as the title
runs in the original--we enter upon the final stage in ibsen's career.
"you are essentially right," the poet wrote to count prozor in march
1900, "when you say that the series which closes with the epilogue
(_when we dead awaken_) began with _master builder solness_."

"ibsen," says dr. brahm, "wrote in christiania all the four works which
he thus seems to bracket together--_solness_, _eyolf_, _borkman_, and
_when we dead awaken_. he returned to norway in july 1891, for a stay of
indefinite length; but the restless wanderer over europe was destined
to leave his home no more.... he had not returned, however, to throw
himself, as of old, into the battle of the passing day. polemics are
entirely absent from the poetry of his old age. he leaves the state and
society at peace. he who had departed as the creator of falk [in _love's
comedy_] now, on his return, gazes into the secret places of human
nature and the wonder of his own soul."

dr. brahm, however, seems to be mistaken in thinking that ibsen returned
to norway with no definite intention of settling down. dr. julius elias
(an excellent authority) reports that shortly before ibsen left munich
in 1891, he remarked one day, "i must get back to the north!" "is that
a sudden impulse?" asked elias. "oh no," was the reply; "i want to be
a good head of a household and have my affairs in order. to that end i
must consolidate may property, lay it down in good securities, and
get it under control--and that one can best do where one has rights of
citizenship." some critics will no doubt be shocked to find the poet
whom they have written down an "anarchist" confessing such bourgeois
motives.

after his return to norway, ibsen's correspondence became very scant,
and we have no letters dating from the period when he was at work on
_the master builder_. on the other hand, we possess a curious lyrical
prelude to the play, which he put on paper on march 16, 1892. it is
said to have been his habit, before setting to work on a play, to
"crystallise in a poem the mood which then possessed him;" but the
following is the only one of these keynote poems which has been
published. i give it in the original language, with a literal
translation:


de sad der, de to--

     de sad der, de to, i saa lunt et hus
     ved host og i venterdage,
     saa braendte huset.  alt ligger i grus.
     de to faar i asken rage.

     for nede id en er et smykke gemt,--
     et smykke, som aldrig kan braende.
     og leder de trofast, haender det nemt
     at det findes af ham eller hende.

     men finder de end, brandlidte to,
     det dyre, ildfaste smykke,--
     aldrig han finder sin braendte tro,
     han aldrig sin braendte lykke.


they sat there, the two--

  they sat there, the two, in so cosy a house, through autumn
  and winter days.  then the house burned down.  everything
  lies in ruins.  the two must grope among the ashes.

  for among them is hidden a jewel--a jewel that never can burn.
  and if they search faithfully, it may easily happen that he
  or she may find it.

  but even should they find it, the burnt-out two--find this
  precious unburnable jewel--never will she find her burnt faith,
  he never his burnt happiness.


this is the latest piece of ibsen's verse that has been given to the
world; but one of his earliest poems--first printed in 1858--was also,
in some sort, a prelude to _the master builder_. of this a literal
translation may suffice. it is called,


building-plans

  i remember as clearly as if it had been to-day the evening
  when, in the paper, i saw my first poem in print.  there i
  sat in my den, and, with long-drawn puffs, i smoked and i
  dreamed in blissful self-complacency.

  "i will build a cloud-castle.  it shall shine all over the
  north.  it shall have two wings: one little and one great.
  the great wing shall shelter a deathless poet; the little
  wing shall serve as a young girl's bower."

  the plan seemed to me nobly harmonious; but as time went on
  it fell into confusion.  when the master grew reasonable, the
  castle turned utterly crazy; the great wing became too little,
  the little wing fell to ruin.


thus we see that, thirty-five years before the date of _the master
builder_, ibsen's imagination was preoccupied with a symbol of a master
building a castle in the air, and a young girl in one of its towers.

there has been some competition among the poet's young lady friends for
the honour of having served as his model for hilda. several, no doubt,
are entitled to some share in it. one is not surprised to learn that
among the papers he left behind were sheaves upon sheaves of letters
from women. "all these ladies," says dr. julius elias, "demanded
something of him--some cure for their agonies of soul, or for the
incomprehension from which they suffered; some solution of the riddle of
their nature. almost every one of them regarded herself as a problem
to which ibsen could not but have the time and the interest to apply
himself. they all thought they had a claim on the creator of nora....
of this chapter of his experience, fru ibsen spoke with ironic
humour. 'ibsen (i have often said to him), ibsen, keep these swarms of
over-strained womenfolk at arm's length.' 'oh no (he would reply), let
them alone. i want to observe them more closely.' his observations would
take a longer or shorter time as the case might be, and would always
contribute to some work of art."

the principal model for hilda was doubtless fraulein emilie bardach,
of vienna, whom he met at gossensass in the autumn of 1889. he was then
sixty-one years of age; she is said to have been seventeen. as the lady
herself handed his letters to dr. brandes for publication, there can be
no indiscretion in speaking of them freely. some passages from them i
have quoted in the introduction to _hedda gabler_--passages which show
that at first the poet deliberately put aside his gossensass impressions
for use when he should stand at a greater distance from them, and
meanwhile devoted himself to work in a totally different key. on october
15, 1889, he writes, in his second letter to fraulein bardach: "i
cannot repress my summer memories, nor do i want to. i live through my
experiences again and again. to transmute it all into a poem i find, in
the meantime, impossible. in the meantime? shall i succeed in doing
so some time in the future? and do i really wish to succeed? in the
meantime, at any rate, i do not.... and yet it must come in time." the
letters number twelve in all, and are couched in a tone of sentimental
regret for the brief, bright summer days of their acquaintanceship. the
keynote is struck in the inscription on the back of a photograph
which he gave her before they parted: _an die maisonne eines
septemberlebens--in tirol_,(1) 27/9/89. in her album he had written the
words:


     hohes, schmerzliches gluck--
     um das unerreichbare zu ringen!(2)


in which we may, if we like, see a foreshadowing of the solness frame
of mind. in the fifth letter of the series he refers to her as "an
enigmatic princess"; in the sixth he twice calls her "my dear princess";
but this is the only point at which the letters quite definitely and
unmistakably point forward to _the master builder_. in the ninth letter
(february 6, 1890) he says: "i feel it a matter of conscience to end,
or at any rate, to restrict, our correspondence." the tenth letter,
six months later, is one of kindly condolence on the death of the young
lady's father. in the eleventh (very short) note, dated december 30,
1890, he acknowledges some small gift, but says: "please, for the
present, do not write me again.... i will soon send you my new play
[_hedda gabler_]. receive it in friendship, but in silence!" this
injunction she apparently obeyed. when _the master builder_ appeared, it
would seem that ibsen did not even send her a copy of the play; and we
gather that he was rather annoyed when she sent him a photograph
signed "princess of orangia." on his seventieth birthday, however, she
telegraphed her congratulations, to which he returned a very cordial
reply. and here their relations ended.

that she was right, however, in regarding herself as his principal model
for hilda appears from an anecdote related by dr. elias.(3) it is not
an altogether pleasing anecdote, but dr. elias is an unexceptionable
witness, and it can by no means be omitted from an examination into the
origins of _the master builder_. ibsen had come to berlin in february
1891 for the first performance of _hedda gabler_. such experiences were
always a trial to him, and he felt greatly relieved when they were over.
packing, too, he detested; and elias having helped him through this
terrible ordeal, the two sat down to lunch together, while awaiting the
train. an expansive mood descended upon ibsen, and chuckling over his
champagne glass, he said: "do you know, my next play is already hovering
before me--of course in vague outline. but of one thing i have got
firm hold. an experience: a woman's figure. very interesting, very
interesting indeed. again a spice of the devilry in it." then he
related how he had met in the tyrol a viennese girl of very remarkable
character. she had at once made him her confidant. the gist of her
confessions was that she did not care a bit about one day marrying
a well brought-up young man--most likely she would never marry. what
tempted and charmed and delighted her was to lure other women's husbands
away from them. she was a little daemonic wrecker; she often appeared to
him like a little bird of prey, that would fain have made him, too, her
booty. he had studied her very, very closely. for the rest, she had had
no great success with him. "she did not get hold of me, but i got
hold of her--for my play. then i fancy" (here he chuckled again) "she
consoled herself with some one else." love seemed to mean for her only
a sort of morbid imagination. this, however, was only one side of her
nature. his little model had had a great deal of heart and of womanly
understanding; and thanks to the spontaneous power she could gain over
him, every woman might, if she wished it, guide some man towards the
good. "thus ibsen spoke," says elias, "calmly and coolly, gazing as it
were into the far distance, like an artist taking an objective view of
some experience--like lubek speaking of his soul-thefts. he had stolen
a soul, and put it to a double employment. thea elvsted and hilda wangel
are intimately related--are, indeed only different expressions of the
same nature." if ibsen actually declared thea and hilda to be drawn from
one model, we must of course take his word for it; but the relationship
is hard to discern.

there can be no reasonable doubt, then, that the gossensass episode gave
the primary impulse to _the master builder_. but it seems pretty well
established, too, that another lady, whom he met in christiania after
his return in 1891, also contributed largely to the character of
hilda. this may have been the reason why he resented fraulein bardach's
appropriating to herself the title of "princess of orangia."

the play was published in the middle of december 1892. it was acted both
in germany and england before it was seen in the scandinavian capitals.
its first performance took place at the lessing theatre, berlin, january
19, 1893, with emanuel reicher as solness and frl. reisenhofer as hilda.
in london it was first performed at the trafalgar square theatre (now
the duke of york's) on february 20, 1893, under the direction of mr.
herbert waring and miss elizabeth robins, who played solness and hilda.
this was one of the most brilliant and successful of english ibsen
productions. miss robins was almost an ideal hilda, and mr. waring's
solness was exceedingly able. some thirty performances were give in all,
and the play was reproduced at the opera comique later in the season,
with mr. lewis waller as solness. in the following year miss robins
acted hilda in manchester. in christiania and copenhagen the play was
produced on the same evening, march 8, 1893; the copenhagen solness
and hilda were emil poulsen and fru hennings. a swedish production,
by lindberg, soon followed, both in stockholm and gothenburg. in paris
_solness le constructeur_ was not seen until april 3, 1894, when it
was produced by "l'oeuvre" with m. lugne-poe as solness. the company,
sometimes with mme. suzanne despres and sometimes with mme. berthe
bady as hilda, in 1894 and 1895 presented the play in london, brussels,
amsterdam, milan, and other cities. in october 1894 they visited
christiania, where ibsen was present at one of their performances, and
is reported by herman bang to have been so enraptured with it that he
exclaimed, "this is the resurrection of my play!" on this occasion mme.
bady was the hilda. the first performance of the play in america took
place at the carnegie lyceum, new york, on january 16, 1900, with
mr. william h. pascoe as solness and miss florence kahn as hilda.
the performance was repeated in the course of the same month, both at
washington and boston.

in england, and probably elsewhere as well, _the master builder_
produced a curious double effect. it alienated many of the poet's
staunchest admirers, and it powerfully attracted many people who had
hitherto been hostile to him. looking back, it is easy to see why this
should have been so; for here was certainly a new thing in drama, which
could not but set up many novel reactions. a greater contrast could
scarcely be imagined than that between the hard, cold, precise outlines
of _hedda gabler_ and the vague mysterious atmosphere of _the master
builder_, in which, though the dialogue is sternly restrained within
the limits of prose, the art of drama seems for ever on the point of
floating away to blend with the art of music. substantially, the play
is one long dialogue between solness and hilda; and it would be quite
possible to analyse this dialogue in terms of music, noting (for
example) the announcement first of this theme and then of that, the
resumption and reinforcement of a theme which seemed to have been
dropped, the contrapuntal interweaving of two or more motives, a scherzo
here, a fugal passage there. leaving this exercise to some one more
skilled in music (or less unskilled) than myself, i may note that in
_the master builder_ ibsen resumes his favourite retrospective method,
from which in _hedda gabler_ he had in great measure departed. but the
retrospect with which we are here concerned is purely psychological. the
external events involved in it are few and simple in comparison with
the external events which are successively unveiled in retrospective
passages of _the wild duck_ or _rosmersholm_. the matter of the play
is the soul-history of halvard solness, recounted to an impassioned
listener--so impassioned, indeed, that the soul-changes it begets in her
form an absorbing and thrilling drama. the graduations, retardations,
accelerations of solness's self-revealment are managed with the subtlest
art, so as to keep the interest of the spectator ever on the stretch.
the technical method was not new; it was simply that which ibsen had
been perfecting from _pillars of society_ onward; but it was applied to
a subject of a nature not only new to him, but new to literature.

that the play is full of symbolism it would be futile to deny; and the
symbolism is mainly autobiographic. the churches which solness sets out
building doubtless represent ibsen's early romantic plays, the "homes
for human beings" his social drama; while the houses with high towers,
merging into "castles in the air," stand for those spiritual dramas,
with a wide outlook over the metaphysical environment of humanity, on
which he was henceforth to be engaged. perhaps it is not altogether
fanciful to read a personal reference into solness's refusal to call
himself an architect, on the ground that his training has not been
systematic--that he is a self-taught man. ibsen too was in all
essentials self-taught; his philosophy was entirely unsystematic; and,
like solness, he was no student of books. there may be an introspective
note also in that dread of the younger generation to which solness
confesses. it is certain that the old master-builder was not lavish
of his certificates of competence to young aspirants, though there is
nothing to show that his reticence ever depressed or quenched any rising
genius.

on the whole, then, it cannot be doubted that several symbolic motives
are inwoven into the iridescent fabric of the play. but it is a
great mistake to regard it as essentially and inseparably a piece of
symbolism. essentially it is a history of a sickly conscience, worked
out in terms of pure psychology. or rather, it is a study of a
sickly and a robust conscience side by side. "the conscience is very
conservative," ibsen has somewhere said; and here solness's conservatism
is contrasted with hilda's radicalism--or rather would-be radicalism,
for we are led to suspect, towards the close, that the radical too is a
conservative in spite or herself. the fact that solness cannot climb as
high as he builds implies, i take it, that he cannot act as freely as
he thinks, or as hilda would goad him into thinking. at such an altitude
his conscience would turn dizzy, and life would become impossible to
him. but here i am straying back to the interpretation of symbols. my
present purpose is to insist that there is nothing in the play which has
no meaning on the natural-psychological plane, and absolutely requires
a symbolic interpretation to make it comprehensible. the symbols are
harmonic undertones; the psychological melody is clear and consistent
without any reference to them.(4) it is true that, in order to accept
the action on what we may call the realistic level, we must suppose
solness to possess and to exercise, sometimes unconsciously, a
considerable measure of hypnotic power. but time is surely past when
we could reckon hypnotism among "supernatural" phenomena. whether the
particular forms of hypnotic influence attributed to solness do actually
exist is a question we need not determine. the poet does not demand our
absolute credence, as though he were giving evidence in the witness-box.
what he requires is our imaginative acceptance of certain incidents
which he purposely leaves hovering on the border between the natural and
the preternatural, the explained and the unexplained. in this play, as
in _the lady from the sea_ and _little eyolf_, he shows a delicacy of
art in his dalliance with the occult which irresistibly recalls the
exquisite genius of nathaniel hawthorne.(5)

the critics who insist on finding nothing but symbolism in the play have
fastened on mrs. solness's "nine lovely dolls," and provided the most
amazing interpretations for them. a letter which i contributed in 1893
to the _westminster gazette_ records an incident which throws a curious
light on the subject and may be worth preserving. "at a recent first
night," i wrote, "i happened to be seated just behind a well-known
critic. he turned round to me and said, 'i want you to tell me what is
your theory of those "nine lovely dolls." of course one can see that
they are entirely symbolical.' 'i am not so sure of that,' i replied,
remembering a norwegian cousin of my own who treasured a favourite doll
until she was nearer thirty than twenty. 'they of course symbolise the
unsatisfied passion of motherhood in mrs. solness's heart, but i have
very little doubt that ibsen makes use of this "symbol" because he has
observed a similar case, or cases, in real life.' 'what!' cried the
critic. 'he has seen a grown-up, a middle-aged woman continuing to "live
with" her dolls!' i was about to say that it did not seem to me so very
improbable, when a lady who was seated next me, a total stranger to both
of us, leant forward and said, 'excuse my interrupting you, but it
may perhaps interest you to know that i have three dolls to which i am
deeply attached!' i will not be so rude as to conjecture this lady's
age, but we may be sure that a very young woman would not have had the
courage to make such an avowal. does it not seem that ibsen knows a
thing or two about human nature--english as well as norwegian--which
we dramatic critics, though bound by our calling to be subtle
psychologists, have not yet fathomed?" in the course of the
correspondence which followed, one very apposite anecdote was quoted
from an american paper, the _argonaut_: "an old virginia lady said to
a friend, on finding a treasured old cup cracked by a careless maid,
'i know of nothing to compare with the affliction of losing a handsome
piece of old china.' 'surely,' said the friend, 'it is not so bad as
losing one's children.' 'yes, it is,' replied the old lady, 'for when
your children die, you do have the consolations of religion, you know.'"

it would be a paradox to call _the master builder_ ibsen's greatest
work, but one of his three or four greatest it assuredly is. of all his
writings, it is probably the most original, the most individual, the
most unlike any other drama by any other writer. the form of _brand_ and
_peer gynt_ was doubtless suggested by other dramatic poems--notably by
_faust_. in _the wild duck_, in _rosmersholm_, in _hedda gabler_, even
in _little eyolf_ and _john gabriel borkman_, there remain faint traces
of the french leaven which is so strong in the earlier plays. but _the
master builder_ had no model and has no parallel. it shows no slightest
vestige of outside influence. it is ibsen, and nothing but ibsen.

w.a.



*footnotes.

 (1)"to the may-sun of a september life--in tyrol."

 (2)"high, painful happiness--to struggle for the unattainable!"

 (3)_neus deutsche rundschau_, december, 1906, p.1462.

 (4)this conception i have worked out at much greater length in an
   essay entitled _the melody of the master builder_, appended to
   the shilling edition of the play, published in 1893.  i there
   retell the story, transplanting it to england and making the hero
   a journalist instead of an architect, in order to show that (if
   we grant the reality of certain commonly-accepted phenomena of
   hypnotism) there is nothing incredible or even extravagantly
   improbable about it.  the argument is far too long to be included
   here, but the reader who is interested in the subject may find it
   worth referring to.

 (5)for an instance of the technical methods by which he suggested
   the supernormal element in the atmosphere of the play, see
   introduction to _a doll's house_, p. xiv.





the master builder.

play in three acts.



characters.


  halvard solness, master builder.
  aline solness, his wife.
  doctor herdal, physician.
  knut brovik, formerly an architect, now in solness's employment.
  ragnar brovik, his son, draughtsman.
  kaia brovik, his niece, book-keeper.
  miss hilda wangel.
  some ladies.
  a crowd in the street.


  the action passes in and about solness's house.




act first.

  a plainly-furnished work-room in the house of halvard solness.
  folding doors on the left lead out to the hall.  on the right
  is the door leading to the inner rooms of the house.  at the
  back is an open door into the draughtsmen's office.  in front,
  on the left, a desk with books, papers and writing materials.
  further back than the folding door, a stove.  in the right-
  hand corner, a sofa, a table, and one or two chairs.  on the
  table a water-bottle and glass.  a smaller table, with a
  rocking-chair and arm-chair, in front on the right.  lighted
  lamps, with shades, on the table in the draughtmen's office,
  on the table in the corner, and on the desk.

  in the draughtsmen's office sit knut brovik and his son ragnar,
  occupied with plans and calculations.  at the desk in the outer
  office stands kaia fosli, writing in the ledger.  knut brovick
  is a spare old man with white hair and beard.  he wears a
  rather threadbare but well-brushed black coat, with spectacles,
  and a somewhat discoloured white neckcloth.  ragnar brovik is
  a well-dressed, light-haired man in his thirties, with a
  slight stoop.  kaia fosli is a slightly built girl, a little
  over twenty, carefully dressed, and delicate-looking.  she has
  a green shade over her eyes.--all three go on working for some
  time in silence.


knut brovik.

[rises suddenly, as if in distress, from the table; breathes heavily and
laboriously as he comes forward into the doorway.] no, i can't bear it
much longer!

kaia.

[going up to him.] you are feeling very ill this evening, are you not,
uncle?


brovik.

oh, i seem to get worse every day.


ragnar.

[has risen and advances.] you ought to go home, father. try to get a
little sleep--


brovik.

[impatiently.] go to bed, i suppose? would you have me stifled outright?


kaia.

then take a little walk.


ragnar.

yes, do. i will come with you.


brovik.

[with warmth.] i will not go till he comes! i and determined to have
it out this evening with--[in a tone of suppressed bitterness]--with
him--with the chief.


kaia.

[anxiously.] oh no, uncle,--do wait awhile before doing that!


ragnar.

yes, better wait, father!


brovik.

[draws is breath laboriously.] ha--ha--! _i_ haven't much time for
waiting.


kaia.

[listening.] hush! i hear him on the stairs.

     [all three go back to their work.  a short silence.


  halvard solness comes in through the hall door.  he is a man no
  longer young, but healthy and vigorous, with close-cut curly
  hair, dark moustache and dark thick eyebrows.  he wears a
  greyish-green buttoned jacket with an upstanding collar and
  broad lapels.  on his head he wears a soft grey felt hat,
  and he has one or two light portfolios under his arm.


solness.

[near the door, points towards the draughtsmen's office, and asks in a
whisper:] are they gone?


kaia.

[softly, shaking her] no.

     [she takes the shade off her eyes.  solness crosses the room,
       throws his hat on a chair, places the portfolios on the table
       by the sofa, and approaches the desk again.  kaia goes on
       writing without intermission, but seems nervous and uneasy.


solness.

[aloud.] what is that you are entering, miss fosli?


kaia.

[starts.] oh, it is only something that--


solness.

let me look at it, miss fosli. [bends over her, pretends to be looking
into the ledger, and whispers:] kaia!


kaia.

[softly, still writing.] well?


solness.

why do you always take that shade off when i come?


kaia.

[as before.] i look so ugly with it on.


solness.

[smiling.] then you don't like to look ugly, kaia?


kaia.

[half glancing up at him.] not for all the world. not in your eyes.


solness.

[strokes her hair gently.] poor, poor little kaia--


kaia.

[bending her head.] hush--they can hear you!

     [solness strolls across the room to the right, turns and pauses
       at the door of the draughtsmen's office.


solness.

has any one been here for me?


ragnar.

[rising.] yes, the young couple who want a villa built, out at
lovstrand.


solness.

[growling.] oh, those two! they must wait. i am not quite clear about
the plans yet.


ragnar.

[advancing, with some hesitation.] they were very anxious to have the
drawings at once.


solness.

[as before.] yes, of course--so they all are.


brovik.

[looks up.] they say they are longing so to get into a house of their
own.


solness.

yes, yes--we know all that! and so they are content to take whatever
is offered them. they get a--a roof over their heads--an address--but
nothing to call a home. no thank you! in that case, let them apply to
somebody else. tell them that, the next time they call.


brovik.

[pushes his glasses up on to his forehead and looks in astonishment at
him.] to somebody else? are you prepared to give up the commission?


solness.

[impatiently.] yes, yes, yes, devil take it! if that is to be the way of
it--. rather that, than build away at random. [vehemently.] besides, i
know very little about these people as yet.


brovik.

the people are safe enough. ragnar knows them. he is a friend of the
family.


solness.

oh, safe--safe enough! that is not at all what i mean. good lord--don't
you understand me either? [angrily.] i won't have anything to do with
these strangers. they may apply to whom they please, so far as i am
concerned.


brovik.

[rising.] do you really mean that?


solness.

[sulkily.] yes i do.--for once in a way. [he comes forward.

     [brovik exchanges a glance with ragnar, who makes a warning
       gesture.  then brovik comes into the front room.


brovik.

may i have a few words with you?


solness.

certainly.


brovik.

[to kaia.] just go in there for moment, kaia.


kaia.

[uneasily.] oh, but uncle--


brovik.

do as i say, child. and shut the door after you.

     [kaia goes reluctantly into the draughtsmen's office, glances
       anxiously and imploringly at solness, and shuts the door.


brovik.

[lowering his voice a little.] i don't want the poor children to know
how i am.


solness.

yes, you have been looking very poorly of late.


brovik.

it will soon be all over with me. my strength is ebbing--from day to
day.


solness.

won't you sit down?


brovik.

thanks--may i?


solness.

[placing the arm-chair more conveniently.] here--take this chair.--and
now?


brovik.

[has seated himself with difficulty.] well, you see, it's about ragnar.
that is what weighs most upon me. what is to become of him?


solness.

of course your son will stay with me as long as ever he likes.


brovik.

but that is just what he does not like. he feels that he cannot stay
here any longer.


solness.

why, i should say he was very well off here. but if he wants more money,
i should not mind--


brovik.

no, no! it is not that. [impatiently.] but sooner or later he, too, must
have a chance of doing something on his own account.


solness.

[without looking at him.] do you think that ragnar has quite talent
enough to stand alone?


brovik.

no, that is just the heartbreaking part of it--i have begun to have
my doubts about the boy. for you have never said so much as--as one
encouraging word about him. and yet i cannot but think there must be
something in him--he can't be without talent.


solness.

well, but he has learnt nothing--nothing thoroughly, i mean. except, of
course, to draw.


brovik.

[looks at him with covert hatred, and says hoarsely.] you had learned
little enough of the business when you were in my employment. but
that did not prevent you from setting to work--[breathing with
difficulty]--and pushing your way up, and taking the wind out of my
sails--mine, and so may other people's.


solness.

yes, you see--circumstances favoured me.


brovik.

you are right there. everything favoured you. but then how can you have
the heart to let me go to my grave--without having seen what ragnar is
fit for? and of course i am anxious to see them married, too--before i
go.


solness.

[sharply.] is it she who wishes it?


brovik.

not kaia so much as ragnar--he talks about it every day. [appealingly.]
you must help him to get some independent work now! i must see something
that the lad has done. do you hear?


solness.

[peevishly.] hang it, man, you can't expect me to drag commissions down
from the moon for him!


brovik.

he has the chance of a capital commission at this very moment. a big bit
of work.


solness.

[uneasily, startled.] has he?


brovik.

i you would give your consent.


solness.

what sort of work do you mean?


brovik.

[with some hesitation.] he can have the building of that villa out at
lovstrand.


solness.

that! why i am going to build that myself.


brovik.

oh you don't much care about doing it.


solness.

[flaring up.] don't care! who dares to say that?


brovik.

you said so yourself just now.


solness.

oh, never mind what i say.--would they give ragnar the building of that
villa?


brovik.

yes. you see, he knows the family. and then--just for the fun of the
thing--he has made drawings and estimates and so forth--


solness.

are they pleased with the drawings? the people who will have to live in
the house?


brovik.

yes. if you would only look through them and approve of them--


solness.

then they would let ragnar build their home for them?


brovik.

they were immensely pleased with his idea. they thought it exceedingly
original, they said.


solness.

oho! original! not the old-fashioned stuff that _i_ am in the habit of
turning out!


brovik.

it seemed to them different.


solness.

[with suppressed irritation.] so it was to see ragnar that they came
here--whilst i was out!


brovik.

they came to call upon you--and at the same time to ask whether you
would mind retiring--


solness.

[angrily.] retire? i?


brovik.

in case you thought that ragnar's drawings--


solness.

i! retire in favour of your son!


brovik.

retire from the agreement, they meant.


solness.

oh, it comes to the same thing. [laughs angrily.] so that is it, is it?
halvard solness is to see about retiring now! to make room for younger
men! for the very youngest, perhaps! he must make room! room! room!


brovik.

why, good heavens! there is surely room for more than one single man--


solness.

oh, there's not so very much room to spare either. but, be that as it
may--i will never retire! i will never give way to anybody! never of my
own free will. never in this world will i do that!


brovik.

[rise with difficulty.] then i am to pass out of life without any
certainty? without a gleam of happiness? without any faith or trust in
ragnar? without having seen a single piece of work of his doing? is that
to be the way of it?


solness.

[turns half aside, and mutters.] h'm--don't ask more just now.


brovik.

i must have an answer to this one question. am i to pass out of life in
such utter poverty?


solness.

[seems to struggle with himself; finally he says, in a low but firm
voice:] you must pass out of life as best you can.


brovik.

then be it so. [he goes up the room.


solness.

[following him, half is desperation.] don't you understand that i cannot
help it? i am what i am, and i cannot change my nature!


brovik.

no; i suppose that you can't. [reels and supports himself against the
sofa-table.] may i have a glass of water?


solness.

by all means. [fills a glass and hands it to him.


brovik.

thanks. [drinks and puts the glass down again.

     [solness goes up and opens the door of the draughtsmen's office.


solness.

ragnar--you must come and take your father home.


  ragnar rises quickly.  he and kaia come into the work-room.


ragnar.

what is the matter, father?


brovik.

give me your arm. now let us go.


ragnar.

very well. you had better put your things on, too, kaia.


solness.

miss fosli must stay--just for a moment. there is a letter i want
written.


brovik.

[looks at solness.] good night. sleep well--if you can.


solness.

good night.

     [brovik and ragnar go out by the hall-door.  kaia goes to the
       desk.  solness stands with bent head, to the right, by the
       arm-chair.


kaia.

[dubiously.] is there any letter?


solness.

[curtly.] no, of course not. [looks sternly at her.] kaia!


kaia.

[anxiously, in a low voice.] yes!


solness.

[points imperatively to a spot on the floor.] come here! at once!


kaia.

[hesitatingly.] yes.


solness.

[as before.] nearer!


kaia.

[obeying.] what do you want with me?


solness.

[looks at her for a while.] is it you i have to thank for all this?


kaia.

no, no, don't think that!


solness.

but confess now--you want to get married!


kaia.

[softly.] ragnar and i have been engaged for four or five years, and
so--


solness.

and so you think it time there were an end of it. is not that so?


kaia.

ragnar and uncle say i must. so i suppose i shall have to give in.


solness.

[more gently.] kaia, don't you really care a little bit for ragnar, too?


kaia.

i cared very much for ragnar once--before i came here to you.


solness.

but you don't now? not in the least?


kaia.

[passionately, clasping hands and holding them out towards him.] oh, you
know very well there is only one person i care for now! i shall never
care for any one else.


solness.

yes, you say that. and yet you go away from me--leave me alone here with
everything on my hands.


kaia.

but could i not stay with you, even if ragnar--?


solness.

[repudiating the idea.] no, no, that is quite impossible. if ragnar
leaves me and starts work on his own account, then of course he will
need you himself.


kaia.

[wringing her hands.] oh, i feel as if i could not be separated from
you! it's quite, quite impossible!


solness.

then be sure you get those foolish notions out of ragnar's head. marry
him as much as you please--[alters his tone.] i mean--don't let him
throw up his good situation with me. for then i can keep you too, my
dear kaia.


kaia.

oh yes, how lovely that would be, if it could only be managed!


solness.

[clasps her head with his two hands and whispers.] for i cannot get on
without you, you see. i must have you with me every single day.


kaia.

[in nervous exaltation.] my god! my god!


solness.

[kisses her hair.] kaia--kaia!


kaia.

[sinks down before him.] oh, how good you are to me! how unspeakably
good you are!


solness.

[vehemently.] get up! for goodness' sake get up! i think i hear some
one.

     [he helps her to rise.  she staggers over to the desk.


  mrs. solness enters by the door on the right.  she looks thin
  and wasted with grief, but shows traces of bygone beauty.
  blonde ringlets.  dressed with good taste, wholly in black.
  speaks some-what slowly and in a plaintive voice.


mrs. solness.

[in the doorway.] halvard!


solness.

[turns.] oh, are you there, my dear--?


mrs. solness.

[with a glance at kaia.] i am afraid i am disturbing you.


solness.

not in the least. miss fosli has only a short letter to write.


mrs. solness.

yes, so i see.


solness.

what do you want with me, aline?


mrs. solness.

i merely wanted to tell you that dr. herdal is in the drawing-room.
won't you come and see him, halvard?


solness.

[looks suspiciously at her.]. h'm--is the doctor so very anxious to see
me?


mrs. solness.

well, not exactly anxious. he really came to see me; but he would like
to say how-do-you-do to you at the same time.


solness.

[laughs to himself.] yes, i daresay. well, you must ask him to wait a
little.


mrs. solness.

then you will come in presently?


solness.

perhaps i will. presently, presently, dear. in a little while.


mrs. solness.

[glancing again at kaia.] well now, don't forget, halvard.

     [withdraws and closes the door behind her.


kaia.

[softly.] oh dear, oh dear--i am sure mrs. solness thinks ill of me in
some way!


solness.

oh, not in the least. not more than usual at any rate. but all the same,
you had better go now, kaia.


kaia.

yes, yes, now i must go.


solness.

[severely.] and mind you get that matter settled for me. do you hear?


kaia.

oh, if it only depended on me--


solness.

i will have it settled, i say! and to-morrow too--not a day later!


kaia.

[terrified.] if there's nothing else for it, i am quite willing to break
off the engagement.


solness.

[angrily.] break it off. are you mad? would you think of breaking it
off?


kaia.

[distracted.] yes, if necessary. for i must--i must stay here with you!
i can't leave you! that is utterly--utterly impossible!


solness.

[with a sudden outburst.] but deuce take it--how about ragnar then! it's
ragnar that i--


kaia.

[looks at him with terrified eyes.] it is chiefly on ragnar's account,
that--that you--?


solness.

[collecting himself.] no, no, of course not! you don't understand me
either. [gently and softly.] of course it is you i want to keep.--you
above everything, kaia. but for that very reason, you must prevent
ragnar, too, from throwing up his situation. there, there,--now go home.


kaia.

yes, yes--good-night, then.


solness.

good night. [as she is going.] oh, stop a moment! are ragnar's drawings
in there?


kaia.

i did not see him take them with him.


solness.

then just go and find them for me. i might perhaps glance over them,
after all.


kaia.

[happy.] oh yes, please do!


solness.

for your sake, kaia dear. now, let me have them at once, please.

     [kaia hurries into the draughtsmen's office, searches anxiously
       in the table-drawer, finds a portfolio and brings it with her.


kaia.

here are all the drawings.


solness.

good. put them down there on the table.


kaia.

[putting down the portfolio.] good night, then. [beseechingly.] and
please, please think kindly of me.


solness.

oh, that i always do. good-night, my dear little kaia. [glances to the
right.] go, go now!


  mrs. solness and dr. herdal enter by the door on the right.
  he is a stoutish, elderly man, with a round, good-humoured
  face, clean shaven, with thin, light hair, and gold spectacles.


mrs. solness.

[still in the doorway.] halvard, i cannot keep the doctor any longer.


solness.

well then, come in here.


mrs. solness.

[to kaia, who is turning down the desk-lamp.] have you finished the
letter already, miss fosli?


kaia.

[in confusion.] the letter--?


solness.

yes, it was quite a short one.


mrs. solness.

it must have been very short.


solness.

you may go now, miss fosli. and please come in good time to-morrow
morning.


kaia.

i will be sure to. good-night, mrs. solness.

     [she goes out by the hall door.


solness.

are you in a hurry, doctor?


dr. herdal.

no, not at all.


solness.

may i have a little chat with you?


dr. herdal.

with the greatest of pleasure.


solness.

then let us sit down. [he motions the doctor to take the rocking-chair,
and sits down himself in the arm-chair. looks searchingly at him.] tell
me--did you notice anything odd about aline?


dr. herdal.

do you mean just now, when she was here?


solness.

yes, in her manner to me. did you notice anything?


dr. herdal.

[smiling.] well, i admit--one couldn't well avoid noticing that your
wife--h'm--


dr. herdal. --that your wife is not particularly fond of this miss
fosli.


solness.

is that all? i have noticed that myself.


dr. herdal.

and i must say i am scarcely surprised at it.


solness.

at what?


dr. herdal.

that she should not exactly approve of your seeing so much of another
woman, all day and every day.


solness.

no, no, i suppose you are right there--and aline too. but it's
impossible to make any change.


dr. herdal.

could you not engage a clerk?


solness.

the first man that came to hand? no, thank you--that would never do for
me.


dr. herdal.

but now, if your wife--? suppose, with her delicate health, all this
tries her too much?


solness.

even then--i might almost say--it can make no difference. i must keep
kaia fosli. no one else could fill her place.


dr. herdal.

no one else?


solness.

[curtly.] no, no one.


dr. herdal.

[drawing his chair closer.] now listen to me, my dear mr. solness. may i
ask you a question, quite between ourselves?


solness.

by all means.


dr. herdal.

women, you see--in certain matters, they have a deucedly keen
intuition--


solness.

they have, indeed. there is not the least doubt of that. but--?


dr. herdal.

well, tell me now--if your wife can't endure this kaia fosli--?


solness.

well, what then?


dr. herdal. --may she not have just--just the least little bit of reason
for this instinctive dislike?


solness.

[looks at him and rises.] oho!


dr. herdal.

now don't be offended--but hasn't she?


solness.

[with curt decision.] no.


dr. herdal.

no reason of any sort?


solness.

no other than her own suspicious nature.


dr. herdal.

i know you have known a good many women in your time.


solness.

yes, i have.


dr. herdal.

and have been a good deal taken with some of them, too.


solness.

oh yes, i don't deny it.


dr. herdal.

but as regards miss fosli, then? there is nothing of that sort in this
case?


solness.

no; nothing at all--on my side.


dr. herdal.

but on her side?


solness.

i don't think you have any right to ask that question, doctor.


dr. herdal.

well, you know, we were discussing your wife's intuition.


solness.

so we were. and for that matter--[lowers his voice]--aline's intuition,
as you call it--in a certain sense, it has not been so far astray.


dr. herdal.

aha! there we have it!


solness.

[sits down.] doctor herdal--i am going to tell you a strange story--if
you care to listen to it.


dr. herdal.

i like listening to strange stories.


solness.

very well then. i daresay you recollect that i took knut brovik and his
son into my employment--after the old man's business had gone to the
dogs.


dr. herdal.

yes, so i have understood.


solness.

you see, they really are clever fellows, these two. each of them has
talent in his own way. but then the son took it into his head to get
engaged; and the next thing, of course, was that he wanted to get
married--and begin to build on his own account. that is the way with all
these young people.


dr. herdal.

[laughing.] yes, they have a bad habit of wanting to marry.


solness.

just so. but of course that did not suit my plans; for i needed ragnar
myself--and the old man too. he is exceedingly good at calculating
bearing strains and cubic contents--and all that sort of devilry, you
know.


dr. herdal.

oh yes, no doubt that's indispensable.


solness.

yes, it is. but ragnar was absolutely bent on setting to work for
himself. he would hear of nothing else.


dr. herdal.

but he has stayed with you all the same.


solness.

yes, i'll tell you how that came about. one day this girl, kaia fosli,
came to see them on some errand or other. she had never been here
before. and when i saw how utterly infatuated they were with each other,
the thought occurred to me: if i cold only get her into the office here,
then perhaps ragnar too would stay where he is.


dr. herdal.

that was not at all a bad idea.


solness.

yes, but at the time i did not breathe a word of what was in my mind.
i merely stood and looked at her--and kept on wishing intently that
i could have her here. then i talked to her a little, in a friendly
way--about one thing and another. and then she went away.


dr. herdal.

well?


solness.

well then, next day, pretty late in the evening, when old brovik and
ragnar had gone home, she came here again, and behaved as if i had made
an arrangement with her.


dr. herdal.

an arrangement? what about?


solness.

about the very thing my mind had been fixed on. but i hadn't said one
single word about it.


dr. herdal.

that was most extraordinary.


solness.

yes, was it not? and now she wanted to know what she was to do
here--whether she could begin the very next morning, and so forth.


dr. herdal.

don't you think she did it in order to be with her sweetheart?


solness.

that was what occurred to me at first. but no, that was not it. she
seemed to drift quite away from him--when once she had come here to me.


dr. herdal.

she drifted over to you, then?


solness.

yes, entirely. if i happen to look at her when her back is turned, i can
tell that she feels it. she quivers and trembles the moment i come near
her. what do you think of that?


dr. herdal.

h'm--that's not very hard to explain.


solness.

well, but what about the other thing? that she believed i had said to
her what i had only wished and willed--silently--inwardly--to myself?
what do you say to that? can you explain that, dr. herdal?


dr. herdal.

no, i won't undertake to do that.


solness.

i felt sure you would not; and so i have never cared to talk about
it till now.--but it's a cursed nuisance to me in the long run, you
understand. here have i got to go on day after day, pretending--. and
it's a shame to treat her so, too, poor girl. [vehemently.] but i cannot
do anything else. for if she runs away from me--then ragnar will be off
too.


dr. herdal.

and you have not told your wife the rights of the story?


solness.

no.


dr. herdal.

the why on earth don't you?


solness.

[looks fixedly at him, and says in a low voice:] because i seem to
find a sort of--of salutary self-torture in allowing aline to do me an
injustice.


dr. herdal.

[shakes his head.] i don't in the least understand what you mean.


solness.

well, you see--it is like paying off a little bit of a huge,
immeasurable debt--


dr. herdal.

to your wife?


solness.

yes; and that always helps to relieve one's mind a little. one can
breathe more freely for a while, you understand.


dr. herdal.

no, goodness knows, i don't understand at all--


solness.

[breaking off, rises again.] well, well, well--then we won't talk any
more about it. [he saunters across the room, returns, and stops beside
the table. looks at the doctor with a sly smile.] i suppose you think
you have drawn me out nicely now, doctor?


dr. herdal.

[with some irritation.] drawn you out? again i have not the faintest
notion of what you mean, mr. solness.


solness.

oh come, out with it; i have seen it quite clearly, you know.


dr. herdal.

what have you seen?


solness.

[in a low voice, slowly.] that you have been quietly keeping an eye upon
me.


dr. herdal.

that _i_ have! and why in all the world should i do that?


solness.

because you think that i----  [passionately.]  well devil take it--you
think the same of me as aline does.


dr. herdal.

and what does she think about you?


solness.

[having recovered his self-control.] she has begun to think that i
am--that i am--ill.


dr. herdal.

ill! you! she has never hinted such a thing to me. why, what can she
think is the matter with you?


solness.

[leans over the back of the chair and whispers.] aline has made up her
mind that i am mad. that is what she thinks.


dr. herdal.

[rising.] why, my dear fellow--!


solness.

yes, on my soul she does! i tell you it is so. and she has got you to
think the same! oh, i can assure you, doctor, i see it in your face as
clearly as possible. you don't take me in so easily, i can tell you.


dr. herdal.

[looks at him in amazement.] never, mr. solness--never has such a
thought entered my mind.


solness.

[with and incredulous smile.] really? has it not?


dr. herdal.

no, never! nor your wife's mind either, i am convinced. i could almost
swear to that.


solness.

well, i wouldn't advise you to. for, in a certain sense, you see,
perhaps--perhaps she is not so far wrong in thinking something of the
kind.


dr. herdal.

come now, i really must say--


solness.

[interrupting, with a sweep of his hand.] well, well, my dear
doctor--don't let us discuss this any further. we had better agree
to differ. [changes to a tone of quiet amusement.] but look here now,
doctor--h'm--


dr. herdal.

well?


solness.

since you don't believe that i am--ill--and crazy--and mad, and so
forth--


dr. herdal.

what then?


solness.

then i daresay you fancy that i am an extremely happy man.


dr. herdal.

is that mere fancy?


solness.

[laughs.] no, no--of course not! heaven forbid! only think--to be
solness the master builder! halvard solness! what could be more
delightful?


dr. herdal.

yes, i must say it seems to me you have had the luck on your side to an
astounding degree.


solness.

[suppresses a gloomy smile.] so i have. i can't complain on that score.


dr. herdal.

first of all that grim old robbers' castle was burnt down for you. and
that was certainly a great piece of luck.


solness.

[seriously.] it was the home of aline's family. remember that.


dr. herdal.

yes, it must have been a great grief to her.


solness.

she has not got over it to this day--not in all these twelve or thirteen
years.


dr. herdal.

but you--yourself--you rose upon the ruins. you began as a poor boy from
a country village--and now you are at the head of your profession. ah,
yes, mr. solness, you have undoubtedly had the luck on your side.


solness.

[looking at him with embarrassment.] yes, but that is just what makes me
so horribly afraid.


dr. herdal.

afraid? because you have the luck on your side!


solness.

it terrifies me--terrifies me every hour of the day. for sooner or later
the luck must turn, you see.


dr. herdal.

oh nonsense! what should make the luck turn?


solness.

[with firm assurance.] the younger generation!


dr. herdal.

pooh! the younger generation! you are not laid on the shelf yet, i
should hope. oh no--your position here is probably firmer now than it
has ever been.


solness.

the luck will turn. i know it--i feel the day approaching. some one or
other will take it into his head to say: give me a chance! and then all
the rest will come clamouring after him, and shake their fists at me and
shout: make room--make room--! yes, just you see, doctor--presently the
younger generation will come knocking at my door--


dr. herdal.

[laughing.] well, and what if they do?


solness.

what if they do? then there's an end of halvard solness.

     [there is a knock at the door on the left.


solness.

[starts.] what's that? did you not hear something?


dr. herdal.

some one is knocking at the door.


solness.

[loudly.] come in.


  hilda wangel enters by the hall door.  she is of middle height,
  supple, and delicately built.  somewhat sunburnt.  dressed in
  a tourist costume, with skirt caught up for walking, a sailor's
  collar open at the throat, and a small sailor hat on her head.
  knapsack on back, plaid in strap, and alpenstock.


hilda.

[goes straight up to solness, her eyes sparkling with happiness.] good
evening!


solness.

[looks doubtfully at her.] good evening--


hilda.

[laughs.] i almost believe you don't recognise me!


solness.

no--i must admit that--just for the moment--


dr. herdal.

[approaching.] but _i_ recognise you, my dear young lady--


hilda.

[pleased.] oh, is it you that--


dr. herdal.

of course it is. [to solness.] we met at one of the mountain stations
this summer. [to hilda.] what became of the other ladies?


hilda.

oh, they went westward.


dr. herdal.

they didn't much like all the fun we used to have in the evenings.


hilda.

no, i believe they didn't.


dr. herdal.

[holds up his finger at her.] and i am afraid it can't be denied that
you flirted a little with us.


hilda.

well, that was better fun than to sit there knitting stockings with all
those old women.


dr. herdal.

[laughs.] there i entirely agree with you!


solness.

have you come to town this evening?


hilda.

yes, i have just arrived.


dr. herdal.

quite alone, miss wangel?


hilda.

oh yes!


solness.

wangel? is your name wangel?


hilda.

[looks in amused surprise at him.] yes, of course it is.


solness.

then you must be a daughter of the district doctor up at lysanger?


hilda.

[as before.] yes, who else's daughter should i be?


solness.

oh, then i suppose we met up there, that summer when i was building a
tower on the old church.


hilda.

[more seriously.] yes, of course it was then we met.


solness.

well, that is a long time ago.


hilda.

[looks hard at him.] it is exactly ten years.


solness.

you must have been a mere child then, i should think.


hilda.

[carelessly.] well, i was twelve or thirteen.


dr. herdal.

is this the first time you have ever been up to town, miss wangel?


hilda.

yes, it is indeed.


solness.

and don't you know any one here?


hilda.

nobody but you. and of course, your wife.


solness.

so you know her, too?


hilda.

only a little. we spent a few days together at the sanatorium.


solness.

ah, up there?


hilda.

she said i might come and pay her a visit if ever i came up to town.
[smiles.] not that that was necessary.


solness.

odd that she should never have mentioned it.

     [hilda puts her stick down by the stove, takes off the knapsack
       and lays it and the plaid on the sofa.  dr. herdal offers to
       help her.  solness stands and gazes at her.


hilda.

[going towards him.] well, now i must ask you to let me stay the night
here.


solness.

i am sure there will be no difficulty about that.


hilda.

for i have no other clothes than those i stand in, except a change of
linen in my knapsack. and that has to go to the wash, for it's very
dirty.


solness.

oh yes, that can be managed. now i'll just let my wife know--


dr. herdal.

meanwhile i will go and see my patient.


solness.

yes, do; and come again later on.


dr. herdal.

[playfully, with a glance at hilda.] oh that i will, you may be very
certain! [laughs.] so your prediction has come true, mr. solness!


solness.

how so?


dr. herdal.

the younger generation did come knocking at your door.


solness.

[cheerfully.] yes, but in a very different way from what i meant.


dr. herdal.

very different, yes. that's undeniable.

     [he goes out by the hall-door.  solness opens the door on the
       right and speaks into the side room.


solness.

aline! will you come in here, please. here is a friend of yours--miss
wangel.


mrs. solness.

[appears in the doorway.] who do you say it is? [sees hilda.]. oh, is it
you, miss wangel?


solness.

miss wangel has this moment arrived; and she would like to stay the
night here.


mrs. solness.

here with us? oh yes, certainly.


solness.

till she can get her things a little in order, you know.


mrs. solness.

i will do the best i can for you. it's no more than my duty. i suppose
your trunk is coming on later?


hilda.

i have no trunk.


mrs. solness.

well, it will be all right, i daresay. in the meantime, you must excuse
my leaving you here with my husband, until i can get a room made a
little more comfortable for you.


solness.

can we not give her one of the nurseries? they are all ready as it is.


mrs. solness.

oh yes. there we have room and to spare. [to hilda.] sit down now, and
rest a little. [she goes out to the right.

     [hilda, with her hands behind her back, strolls about the room
       and looks at various objects.  solness stands in front, beside
       the table, also with his hands behind his back, and follows
       her with his eyes.


hilda.

[stops and looks at him.] have you several nurseries?


solness.

there are three nurseries in the house.


hilda.

that's a lot. then i suppose you have a great many children?


solness.

no. we have no child. but now you can be the child here, for the time
being.


hilda.

for to-night, yes. i shall not cry. i mean to sleep as sound as a stone.


solness.

yes, you must be very tired, i should think.


hilda.

oh no! but all the same--. it's so delicious to lie and dream.


solness.

do you dream much of nights?


hilda.

oh yes! almost always.


solness.

what do you dream about most?


hilda.

i sha'n't tell you to-night. another time perhaps.

     [she again strolls about the room, stops at the desk and turns
       over the books and papers a little.


solness.

[approaching.] are you searching for anything?


hilda.

no, i am merely looking at all these things. [turns.] perhaps i mustn't?


solness.

oh, by all means.


hilda.

is it you that writes in this great ledger?


solness.

no, it's my book-keeper.


hilda.

is it a woman?


solness.

[smiles.] yes.


hilda.

one you employ here, in your office?


solness.

yes.


hilda.

is she married?


solness.

no, she is single.

hilda.

oh, indeed!


solness.

but i believe she is soon going to be married.


hilda.

that's a good thing for her.


solness.

but not such a good thing for me. for then i shall have nobody to help
me.


hilda.

can't you get hold of some one else who will do just as well?


solness.

perhaps you would stay here and--and write in the ledger?


hilda.

[measures him with a glance.] yes, i daresay! no, thank you--nothing of
that sort for me.

     [she again strolls across the room, and sits down on the
       rocking-chair.  solness too goes to the table.


hilda.

[continuing.] for there must surely be plenty of other thing to be done
here. [looks smilingly at him.] don't you think so, too?


solness.

of course. first of all, i suppose, you want to make a round of the
shops, and get yourself up in the height of fashion.


hilda.

[amused.] no, i think i shall let that alone!


solness.

indeed?


hilda.

for you must know i have run through all my money.


solness.

[laughs.] neither trunk nor money, then?


hilda.

neither one nor the other. but never mind--it doesn't matter now.


solness.

come now, i like you for that.


hilda.

only for that?


solness.

for that among other things. [sits in the arm-chair.] is your father
alive still?


hilda.

yes, father's alive.


solness.

perhaps you are thinking of studying here?


hilda.

no, that hadn't occurred to me.


solness.

but i suppose you will be staying for some time?


hilda.

that must depend upon circumstances.

     [she sits awhile rocking herself and looking at him, half
       seriously, half with a suppressed smile.  then she takes
       off her hat and puts it on the table in front of her.


hilda.

mr. solness!


solness.

well?


hilda.

have you a very bad memory?


solness.

a bad memory? no, not that i am aware of.


hilda.

then have you nothing to say to me about what happened up there?


solness.

[in momentary surprise.] up at lysanger? [indifferently.] why, it was
nothing much to talk about it seems to me.


hilda.

[looks reproachfully at him.] how can you sit there and say such things?


solness.

well, then, you talk to me about it.


hilda.

when the tower was finished, we had grand doings in the town.


solness.

yes, i shall not easily forget that day.


hilda.

[smiles.] will you not? that comes well from you.


solness.

comes well?


hilda.

there was music in the churchyard--and many, many hundreds of people. we
school-girls were dressed in white; and we all carried flags.


solness.

ah yes, those flags--i can tell you i remember them!


hilda.

then you climbed right up the scaffolding, straight to the very top; and
you had a great wreath with you; and you hung that wreath right away up
on the weather-vane.


solness.

[curtly interrupting.] i always did that in those days. it is an old
custom.


hilda.

it was so wonderfully thrilling to stand below and look up at you.
fancy, if he should fall over! he--the master builder himself!


solness.

[as if to divert her from the subject.] yes, yes, yes, that might
very will have happened, too. for one of those white-frocked little
devils,--she went on in such a way, and screamed up at me so--


hilda.

[sparkling with pleasure.] "hurrah for master builder solness!" yes!


solness. --and waved and flourished with her flag, so that i--so that it
almost made me giddy to look at it.


hilda.

[in a lower voice, seriously.] that little devil--that was _i_.


solness.

[fixes his eyes steadily upon her.] i am sure of that now. it must have
been you.


hilda.

[lively again.] oh, it was so gloriously thrilling! i could not have
believed there was a builder in the whole world that could build such a
tremendously high tower. and then, that you yourself should stand at the
very top of it, as large as life! and that you should not be the least
bit dizzy! it was that above everything that made one--made one dizzy to
think of.


solness.

how could you be so certain that i was not?


hilda.

[scouting the idea.] no indeed! oh no! i knew that instinctively. for if
you had been, you could never have stood up there and sung.


solness.

[looks at her in astonishment.] sung? did _i_ sing?


hilda.

yes, i should think you did.


solness.


[shakes his head.] i have never sung a note in my life.


hilda.

yes, indeed, you sang then. it sounded like harps in the air.


solness.

[thoughtfully.] this is very strange--all this.


hilda.

[is silent awhile, looks at him and says in a low voice:] but then,--it
was after that--that the real thing happened.


solness.

the real thing?


hilda.

[sparking with vivacity.] yes, i surely don't need to remind you of
that?


solness.

oh yes do remind me a little of that, too.


hilda.

don't you remember that a great dinner was given in your honour at the
club?


solness.

yes, to be sure. it must have been the same afternoon, for i left the
place next morning.


hilda.

and from the club you were invited to come round to our house to supper.


solness.

quite right, miss wangel. it is wonderful how all these trifles have
impressed themselves on your mind.


hilda.

trifles! i like that! perhaps it was a trifle, too, that i was alone in
the room when you came in?


solness.

were you alone?


hilda.

[without answering him.] you didn't call me a little devil then?


solness.

no, i suppose i did not.


hilda.

you said i was lovely in my white dress, and that i looked like a little
princess.


solness.

i have no doubt you did, miss wangel.--and besides--i was feeling so
buoyant and free that day--


hilda.

and then you said that when i grew up i should be your princess.


solness.

[laughing a little.] dear, dear--did i say that too?


hilda.

yes, you did. and when i asked how long i should have to wait, you
said that you would come again in ten years--like a troll--and carry me
off--to spain or some such place. and you promised you would buy me a
kingdom there.


solness.

[as before.] yes, after a good dinner one doesn't haggle about the
halfpence. but did i really say all that?


hilda.

[laughs to herself.] yes. and you told me, too, what the kingdom was to
be called.


solness.

well, what was it?


hilda.

it was to be called the kingdom of orangia,* you said.

  *in the original "appelsinia," "appelsin" meaning "orange."


solness.

well, that was an appetising name.


hilda.

no, i didn't like it a bit; for it seemed as though you wanted to make
game of me.


solness.

i am sure that cannot have been my intention.


hilda.

no, i should hope not--considering what you did next--


solness.

what in the world did i do next?


hilda.

well, that's the finishing touch, if you have forgotten that too. i
should have thought no one could help remembering such a thing as that.


solness.

yes, yes, just give me a hint, and then perhaps---- well?


hilda.

[looks fixedly at him.] you came and kissed me, mr. solness.


solness.

[open-mouthed.] _i_ did!


hilda.

yes, indeed you did. you took me in both your arms, and bent my head
back, and kissed me--many times.


solness.

now really, my dear miss wangel--!


hilda.

[rises.] you surely cannot mean to deny it?


solness.

yes, i do. i deny it altogether!


hilda.

[looks scornfully at him.] oh, indeed!

       [she turns and goes slowly up to the stove, where she remains
       standing motionless, her face averted from him, her hands
       behind her back.  short pause.


solness.

[goes cautiously up behind her.] miss wangel--!


hilda.

[is silent and does not move.]


solness.

don't stand there like a statue. you must have dreamt all this. [lays
his hand on her arm.] now just listen--


hilda.

[makes an impatient movement with her arm.]


solness.

[as a thought flashes upon him.] or--! wait a moment! there is something
under all this, you may depend!


hilda.

[does not move.]


solness.

[in a low voice, but with emphasis.] i must have thought all that. i
must have wished it--have willed it--have longed to do it. and then--.
may not that be the explanation.


hilda.

[is still silent.]


solness.

[impatiently.] oh very well, deuce take it all--then i did do it, i
suppose.


hilda.

[turns her head a little, but without looking at him.] then you admit it
now?


solness.

yes--whatever you like.


hilda.

you came and put your arms round me?


solness.

oh yes!


hilda.

and bent my head back?

solness.

very far back.


hilda.

and kissed me?


solness.

yes, i did.


hilda.

many times?


solness.

as many as ever you like.


hilda.

[turns quickly toward him and has once more the sparkling expression of
gladness in her eyes.] well, you see, i got it out of you at last!


solness.

[with a slight smile.] yes--just think of my forgetting such a thing as
that.


hilda.

[again a little sulky, retreats from him.] oh, you have kissed so many
people in your time, i suppose.


solness.

no, you mustn't think that of me. [hilda seats herself in the arm-chair.
solness stands and leans against the rocking-chair. looks observantly at
her.] miss wangel!


hilda.

yes!


solness.

how was it now? what came of all this--between us two.


hilda.

why, nothing more came of it. you know that quite well. for then the
other guests came in, and then--bah!


solness.

quite so! the others came in. to think of my forgetting that too!


hilda.

oh, you haven't really forgotten anything: you are only a little ashamed
of it all. i am sure one doesn't forget things of that kind.


solness.

no, one would suppose not.


hilda.

[lively again, looks at him.] perhaps you have even forgotten what day
it was?


solness.

what day--?


hilda.

yes, on what day did you hang the wreath on the tower? well? tell me at
once!


solness.

h'm--i confess i have forgotten the particular day. i only know it was
ten years ago. some time in autumn.


hilda.

[nods her head slowly several times.] it was ten years ago--on the 19th
of september.


solness.

yes, it must have been about that time. fancy your remembering that too!
[stops.] but wait a moment--! yes--it's the 19th of september today.


hilda.

yes, it is; and the ten years are gone. and you didn't come--as you had
promised me.


solness.

promised you? threatened, i suppose you mean?


hilda.

i don't think there was any sort of threat in that.


solness.

well then, a little bit of fun.


hilda.

was that all you wanted? to make fun of me?


solness.

well, or to have a little joke with you. upon my soul, i don't
recollect. but it must have been something of that kind; for you were a
mere child then.


hilda.

oh, perhaps i wasn't quite such a child either. not such a mere chit as
you imagine.


solness.

[looks searchingly at her.] did you really and seriously expect me to
come again?


hilda.

[conceals a half-teasing smile.] yes, indeed! i did expect that of you.


solness.

that i should come back to your home, and take you away with me?


hilda.

just like a troll--yes.


solness.

and make a princess of you?


hilda.

that's what you promised.


solness.

and give you a kingdom as well?


hilda.

[looks up at the ceiling.] why not? of course it need not have been an
actual, every-day sort of a kingdom.


solness.

but something else just as good?


hilda.

yes, at least as good. [looks at him a moment.] i thought, if you could
build the highest church-towers in the world, you could surely manage to
raise a kingdom of one sort or another as well.


solness.

[shakes his head.] i can't quite make you out, miss wangel.


hilda.

can you not? to me it seems all so simple.


solness.

no, i can't make up my mind whether you mean all you say, or are simply
having a joke with me.


hilda.

[smiles.] making fun of you, perhaps? i, too?


solness.

yes, exactly. making fun--of both of us. [looks at her.] is it long
since you found out that i was married?


hilda.

i have know it all along. why do you ask me that?


solness.

[lightly.] oh, well, it just occurred to me. [looks earnestly at her,
and says in a low voice.] what have you come for?


hilda.

i want my kingdom. the time is up.


solness.

[laughs involuntarily.] what a girl you are!


hilda.

[gaily.] out with my kingdom, mr. solness! [raps with her fingers.] the
kingdom on the table!


solness.

[pushing the rocking-chair nearer and sitting down.] now, seriously
speaking--what have you come for? what do you really want to do here?


hilda.

oh, first of all, i want to go round and look at all the things that you
have built.


solness.

that will give you plenty of exercise.


hilda.

yes, i know you have built a tremendous lot.


solness.

i have indeed--especially of late years.


hilda.

many church-towers among the rest? immensely high ones?


solness.

no. i build no more church-towers now. nor churches either.


hilda.

what do you build then?


solness.

homes for human beings.


hilda.

[reflectively.] couldn't you build a little--a little bit of a
church-tower over these homes as well?


solness.

[starting.] what do you mean by that?


hilda.

i mean--something that points--points up into the free air. with the
vane at a dizzy height.


solness.

[pondering a little.] strange that you should say that--for that is just
what i am most anxious to do.


hilda.

[impatiently.] why don't you do it, then?


solness.

[shakes his head.] no, the people will not have it.


hilda.

fancy their not wanting it!


solness.

[more lightly.] but now i am building a new home for myself--just
opposite here.


hilda.

for yourself?


solness.

yes. it is almost finished. and on that there is a tower.


hilda.

a high tower?


solness.

yes.


hilda.

very high?


solness.

no doubt people will say it is too high--too high for a dwelling-house.


hilda.

i'll go out to look at that tower first thing to-morrow morning.


solness.

[sits resting his cheek on his hand, and gazes at her.] tell me, miss
wangel--what is your name? your christian name, i mean.


hilda.

why, hilda, of course.


solness.

[as before.] hilda? indeed?


hilda.

don't you remember that? you called me hilda yourself--that day when you
misbehaved.


solness.

did i really.


hilda.

but then you said "little hilda"; and i didn't like that.


solness.

oh, you didn't like that, miss hilda?


hilda.

no, not at such a time as that. but--"princess hilda"--that will sound
very well, i think.


solness.

very well indeed. princess hilda of--of--what was to be the name of the
kingdom?


hilda.

pooh! i won't have anything to do with that stupid kingdom. i have set
my heart upon quite a different one!


solness.

[has leaned back in the chair, still gazing at her.] isn't it strange--?
the more i think of it now, the more it seems to me as though i had gone
about all these years torturing myself with--h'm--


hilda.

with what?


solness.

with the effort to recover something--some experience, which i seemed to
have forgotten. but i never had the least inkling of what it could be.


hilda.

you should have tied a knot in your pocket-handkerchief, mr. solness.


solness.

in that case, i should simply have had to go racking my brains to
discover what the knot could mean.


hilda.

oh yes, i suppose there are trolls of that kind in the world, too.


solness.

[rises slowly.] what a good thing it is that you have come to me now.


hilda.

[looks deeply into his eyes.] is it a good thing!


solness.

for i have been so lonely here. i have been gazing so helplessly at it
all. [in a lower voice.] i must tell you--i have begun to be afraid of
the younger generation.


hilda.

[with a little snort of contempt.] pooh--is the younger generation
something to be afraid of?


solness.

it is indeed. and that is why i have locked and barred myself in.
[mysteriously.] i tell you the younger generation will one day come and
thunder at my door! they will break in upon me!


hilda.

then i should say you ought to go out and open the door to the younger
generation.


solness.

open the door?


hilda.

yes. let them come in to you on friendly terms, as it were.


solness.

no, no, no! the younger generation--it means retribution, you see. it
comes, as if under a new banner, heralding the turn of fortune.


hilda.

[rises, looks at him, and says with a quivering twitch of her lips.] can
_i_ be of any use to you, mr. solness?


solness.

yes, you can indeed! for you, too, come--under a new banner it seems to
me. you marshalled against youth--!


  dr. herdal comes in by the hall-door.


dr. herdal.

what--you and miss wangel here still?


solness.

yes. we have had no end of things to talk about.


hilda.

both old and new.


dr. herdal.

have you really?


hilda.

oh, it has been the greatest fun. for mr. solness--he has such a
miraculous memory. all the least little details he remembers instantly.


  mrs. solness enters by the door on the right.


mrs. solness.

well, miss wangel, your room is quite ready for you now.


hilda.

oh, how kind you are to me!


solness.

[to mrs. solness.] the nursery?


mrs. solness.

yes, the middle one. but first let us go in to supper.


solness.

[nods to hilda.] hilda shall sleep in the nursery, she shall.


mrs. solness.

[looks at him.] hilda?


solness.

yes, miss wangel's name is hilda. i knew her when she was a child.


mrs. solness.

did you really, halvard? well, shall we go?

     [she takes dr. herdal's arm and goes out with him to the
       right.  hilda has meanwhile been collecting her travelling
       things.


hilda.

[softly and rapidly to solness.] is it true, what you said? can i be of
use to you?


solness.

[takes the things from her.] you are the very being i have needed most.


hilda.

[looks at him with happy, wondering eyes and clasps her hands.] but
then, great heavens--!


solness.

[eagerly.] what--?


hilda.

then i have my kingdom!


solness.

[involuntarily.] hilda--!


hilda.

[again with the quivering twitch of her lips.] almost--i was going to
say.

     [she goes out to the right, solness follows her.




act second.

  a prettily furnished small drawing-room in solness's house.
  in the back, a glass-door leading out to the verandah and
  garden.  the right-hand corner is cut off transversely by
  a large bay-window, in which are flower-stands.  the left-
  hand corner is similarly cut off by a transverse wall, in
  which is a small door papered like the wall.  on each side,
  an ordinary door.  in front, on the right, a console table
  with a large mirror over it.  well-filled stands of plants
  and flowers.  in front, on the left, a sofa with a table
  and chairs.  further back, a bookcase.  well forward in the
  room, before the bay window, a small table and some chairs.
  it is early in the day.

  solness sits by the little table with ragnar brovik's
  portfolio open in front of him.  he is turning the drawings
  over and closely examining some of them.  mrs. solness moves
  about noiselessly with a small watering-pot, attending to her
  flowers.  she is dressed in black as before.  her hat, cloak
  and parasol lie on a chair near the mirror.  unobserved by her,
  solness now and again follows her with his eyes.  neither of
  them speaks.

  kaia fosli enters quietly by the door on the left.


solness.

[turns his head, and says in an off-hand tone of indifference:] well, is
that you?


kaia.

i merely wished to let you know that i have come.


solness.

yes, yes, that's all right. hasn't ragnar come too?


kaia.

no, not yet. he had to wait a little while to see the doctor. but he is
coming presently to hear--


solness.

how is the old man to-day?


kaia.

not well. he begs you to excuse him; he is obliged to keep his bed
to-day.


solness.

why, of course; by all means let him rest. but now, get to your work.


kaia.

yes. [pauses at the door.] do you wish to speak to ragnar when he comes?


solness.

no--i don't know that i have anything particular to say to him.

     [kaia goes out again to the left.  solness remains seated,
       turning over the drawings.


mrs. solness.

[over beside the plants.] i wonder if he isn't going to die now, as
well?


solness.

[looks up at her.] as well as who?


mrs. solness.

[without answering.] yes, yes--depend upon it, halvard, old brovik is
going to die too. you'll see that he will.


solness.

my dear aline, ought you not to go out for a little walk?


mrs. solness.

yes, i suppose i ought to.

     [she continues to attend the flowers.


solness.

[bending over the drawings.] is she still asleep?


mrs. solness.

[looking at him.] is it miss wangel you are sitting there thinking
about?


solness.

[indifferently.] i just happened to recollect her.


mrs. solness.

miss wangle was up long ago.


solness.

oh, was she?


mrs. solness.

when i went in to see her, she was busy putting her things in order.

     [she goes in front of the mirror and slowly begins to put on
       her hat.


solness.

[after a short pause.] so we have found a use for one our nurseries
after all, aline.


mrs. solness.

yes, we have.


solness.

that seems to me better than to have them all standing empty.


mrs. solness.

that emptiness is dreadful; you are right there.


solness.

[closes the portfolio, rises and approaches her.] you will find that
we shall get on far better after this, aline. things will be more
comfortable. life will be easier--especially for you.


mrs. solness.

[looks at him.] after this?


solness.

yes, believe me, aline--


mrs. solness.

do you mean--because she has come here?


solness.

[checking himself.] i mean, of course--when once we have moved into the
new home.

mrs. solness.

[takes her cloak.] ah, do you think so, halvard? will it be better then?


solness.

i can't think otherwise. and surely you think so too?


mrs. solness.

i think nothing at all about the new house.


solness.

[cast down.] it's hard for me to hear you say that; for you know it is
mainly for your sake that i have built it.

     [he offers to help her on with her cloak.


mrs. solness.

[evades him.] the fact is, you do far too much for my sake.


solness.

[with a certain vehemence.] no, no, you really mustn't say that, aline!
i cannot bear to hear you say such things!


mrs. solness.

very well, then i won't say it, halvard.


solness.

but i stick to what _i_ said. you'll see that things will be easier for
you in the new place.


mrs. solness.

oh, heavens--easier for me--!


solness.

[eagerly.] yes, indeed they will! you may be quite sure of that! for you
see--there will be so very, very much there that will remind you of your
own home--


mrs. solness.

the home that used to be father's and mother's--and that was burnt to
the ground--


solness.

[in a low voice.] yes, yes, my poor aline. that was a terrible blow for
you.


mrs. solness.

[breaking out in lamentation.] you may build as much as ever you like,
halvard--you can never build up again a real home for me!


solness.

[crosses the room.] well, in heaven's name, let us talk no more about it
then.


mrs. solness.

we are not in the habit of talking about it. for you always put the
thought away from you--


solness.

[stops suddenly and looks at her.] do i? and why should i do that? put
the thought away from me?


mrs. solness.

oh yes, halvard, i understand you very well. you are so anxious to spare
me--and to find excuses for me too--as much as ever you can.


solness.

[with astonishment in his eyes.] you! is it you--yourself, that your are
talking about, aline?


mrs. solness.

yes, who else should it be but myself?


solness.

[involuntarily to himself.] that too!


mrs. solness.

as for the old house, i wouldn't mind so much about that. when once
misfortune was in the air--why--


solness.

ah, you are right there. misfortune will have its way--as the saying
goes.


mrs. solness.

but it's what came of the fire--the dreadful thing that followed--! that
is the thing! that, that, that!


solness.

[vehemently.] don't think about that, aline!


mrs. solness.

ah, that is exactly what i cannot help thinking about. and now, at last,
i must speak about it, too; for i don't seem to be able to bear it any
longer. and then never to be able to forgive myself--


solness.

[exclaiming.] yourself--!


mrs. solness.

yes, for i had duties on both sides--both towards you and towards the
little ones. i ought to have hardened myself--not to have let the
horror take such hold upon me--nor the grief for the burning of my home.
[wrings her hands.] oh, halvard, if i had only had the strength!


solness.

[softly, much moved, comes closer.] aline--you must promise me never to
think these thoughts any more.--promise me that, dear!


mrs. solness.

oh, promise, promise! one can promise anything.


solness.

[clenches his hands and crosses the room.] oh, but this is hopeless,
hopeless! never a ray of sunlight! not so much as a gleam of brightness
to light up our home!


mrs. solness.

this is no home, halvard.


solness.

oh no, you may well say that. [gloomily.] and god knows whether you are
not right in saying that it will be no better for us in the new house,
either.


mrs. solness.

it will never be any better. just as empty--just as desolate--there as
here.


solness.

[vehemently.] why in all the world have we built it then? can you tell
me that?


mrs. solness.

no; you must answer that question for yourself.


solness.

[glances suspiciously at her.] what do you mean by that, aline?


mrs. solness.

what do i mean?


solness.

yes, in the devil's name! you said it so strangely--as if you had some
hidden meaning in it.


mrs. solness.

no, indeed, i assure you--


solness.

[comes closer.] oh, come now--i know what i know. i have both my eyes
and my ears about me, aline--you may depend upon that!


mrs. solness.

why, what are you talking about? what is it?


solness.

[places himself in front of her.] do you mean to say you don't find a
kind of lurking, hidden meaning in the most innocent word i happen to
say?


mrs. solness.

_i_ do you say? _i_ do that?


solness.

[laughs.] ho-ho-ho! it's natural enough, aline! when you have a sick man
on your hands--


mrs. solness.

[anxiously.] sick? are you ill, halvard?


solness.

[violently.] a half-mad man then! a crazy man! call me what you will.


mrs. solness.

[feels blindly for a chair and sits down.] halvard--for god's sake--


solness.

but you are wrong, both you and the doctor. i am not in the state that
you imagine.

     [he walks up and down the room.  mrs. solness follows him
       anxiously with her eyes.  finally he goes up to her.


solness.

[calmly.] in reality there is nothing whatever the matter with me.


mrs. solness.

no, there isn't, is there? but then what is it that troubles you so?


solness.

why this, that i often feel ready to sink under this terrible burden of
debt--


mrs. solness.

debt, do you say? but you owe no one anything, halvard!


solness.

[softly, with emotion.] i owe a boundless debt to you--to you--to you,
aline.


mrs. solness.

[rises slowly.] what is behind all this? you may just as well tell me at
once.


solness.

but there is nothing behind it! i have never done you any wrong--not
wittingly and willfully, at any rate. and yet--and yet it seems as
though a crushing debt rested upon me and weighed me down.


mrs. solness.

a debt to me?


solness.

chiefly to you.


mrs. solness.

then you are--ill after all, halvard.


solness.

[gloomily.] i suppose i must be--or not far from it. [looks towards the
door to the right, which is opened at this moment.] ah! now it grows
light.


  hilda wangel comes in.  she has made some alteration in her
  dress, and let down her skirt.


hilda.

good morning, mr. solness!


solness.

[nods.] slept well?


hilda.

quite deliciously! like a child in a cradle. oh--i lay and stretched
myself like--like a princess!


solness.

[smiles a little.] you were thoroughly comfortable then?


hilda.

i should think so.


solness.

and no doubt you dreamed, too.


hilda.

yes, i did. but that was horrid.


solness.

was it?


hilda.

yes, for i dreamed i was falling over a frightfully high, sheer
precipice. do you never have that kind of dream?


solness.

oh yes--now and then--


hilda.

it's tremendously thrilling--when you fall and fall--


solness.

it seems to make one's blood run cold.


hilda.

do you draw your legs up under you while you are falling?


solness.

yes, as high as ever i can.


hilda.

so do i.


mrs. solness.

[takes her parasol.] i must go into town now, halvard. [to hilda.] and
i'll try to get one or two things that you may require.


hilda.

[making a motion to throw her arms round her neck.] oh, you dear, mrs.
solness! you are really much too kind to me! frightfully kind--


mrs. solness.

[deprecatingly, freeing herself.] oh, not at all. it's only my duty, so
i am very glad to do it.


hilda.

[offended, pouts.] but really, i think i am quite fit to be seen in the
streets--now that i've put my dress to rights. or do you think i am not?


mrs. solness.

to tell you the truth, i think people would stare at you a little.


hilda.

[contemptuously.] pooh! is that all? that only amuses me.


solness.

[with suppressed ill-humour.] yes, but people might take it into their
heads that you were mad too, you see.


hilda.

mad? are there so many mad people here in town, then?


solness.

[points to his own forehead.] here you see one at all events.


hilda.

you--mr. solness!


solness.

have you not noticed that yet?


hilda.

no, i certainly have not. [reflects and laughs a little.] and
yet--perhaps in one single thing.


solness.

ah, do you hear that, aline?


mrs. solness.

what is that one single thing, miss wangel?


hilda.

no, i won't say.


solness.

oh yes, do!


hilda.

no thank you--i am not so mad as that.


mrs. solness.

when you and miss wangel are alone, i daresay she will tell you,
halvard.


solness.

ah--you think she will?


mrs. solness.

oh yes, certainly. for you have known her so well in the past. ever
since she was a child--you tell me.

     [she goes out by the door on the left.


hilda.

[after a little while.] does your wife dislike me very much?


solness.

did you think you noticed anything of the kind?


hilda.

did you notice it yourself?


solness.

[evasively.] aline has become exceedingly shy with strangers of late
years.


hilda.

has she really?


solness.

but if only you could get to know her thoroughly--! ah, she is so
good--so kind--so excellent a creature--


hilda.

[impatiently.] but if she is all that--what made her say that about her
duty?


solness.

her duty?


hilda.

she said that she would go out and buy something for me, because it was
her duty. oh, i can't bear that ugly, horrid word!


solness.

why not?


hilda.

it sounds so could and sharp, and stinging. duty--duty--duty. don't you
think so, too? doesn't it seem to sting you?


solness.

h'm--haven't thought much about it.


hilda.

yes, it does. and if she is so good--as you say she is--why should she
talk in that way?


solness.

but, good lord, what would you have had her say, then?


hilda.

she might have said she would do it because she had taken a tremendous
fancy to me. she might have said something like that--something really
warm and cordial, you understand.


solness.

[looks at her.] is that how you would like to have it?


hilda.

yes, precisely. [she wanders about the room, stops at the bookcase and
looks at the books.] what a lot of books you have.


solness.

yes, i have got together a good many.


hilda.

do you read them all, too?


solness.

i used to try to. do you read much?


hilda.

no, never! i have given it up. for it all seems so irrelevant.


solness.

that is just my feeling.

     [hilda wanders about a little, stops at the small table, opens
       the portfolio and turns over the contents.


hilda.

are all these your drawings yours?


solness.

no, they are drawn by a young man whom i employ to help me.


hilda.

some one you have taught?


solness.

oh yes, no doubt he has learnt something from me, too.


hilda.

[sits down.] then i suppose he is very clever. [looks at a drawing.]
isn't he?


solness.

oh, he might be worse. for my purpose--


hilda.

oh yes--i'm sure he is frightfully clever.


solness.

do you think you can see that in the drawings?


hilda.

pooh--these scrawlings! but if he has been learning from you--


solness.

oh, so far as that goes--there are plenty of people here that have
learnt from me, and have come to little enough for all that.


hilda.

[looks at him and shakes her head.] no, i can't for the life of me
understand how you can be so stupid.


solness.

stupid? do you think i am so very stupid?


hilda.

yes, i do indeed. if you are content to go about here teaching all these
people--


solness.

[with a slight start.] well, and why not?


hilda.

[rises, half serious, half laughing.] no indeed, mr. solness! what can
be the good of that? no one but you should be allowed to build. you
should stand quite alone--do it all yourself. now you know it.


solness.

[involuntarily.] hilda--!


hilda.

well!


solness.

how in the world did that come into your head?


hilda.

do you think i am so very far wrong then?


solness.

no, that's not what i mean. but now i'll tell you something.


hilda.

well?


solness.

i keep on--incessantly--in silence and alone--brooding on that very
thought.


hilda.

yes, that seems to me perfectly natural.


solness.

[looks somewhat searchingly at her.] perhaps you have noticed it
already?


hilda.

no, indeed i haven't.


solness.

but just now--when you said you thought i was--off my balance? in one
thing, you said--


hilda.

oh, i was thinking of something quite different.


solness.

what was it?


hilda.

i am not going to tell you.


solness.

[crosses the room.] well, well--as you please. [stops at the
bow-window.] come here, and i will show you something.


hilda.

[approaching.] what is it?


solness.

do you see over here in the garden--?


hilda.

yes?


solness.

[points.] right above the great quarry--?


hilda.

that new house, you mean?


solness.

the one that is being built, yes. almost finished.


hilda.

it seems to have a very high tower.


solness.

the scaffolding is still up.


hilda.

is that your new house?


solness.

yes.


hilda.

the house you are soon going to move into?


solness.

yes.


hilda.

[looks at him.] are there nurseries in that house, too?


solness.

three, as there are here.


hilda.

and no child.


solness.

and there never will be one.


hilda.

[with a half-smile.] well, isn't it just as i said--?


solness.

that--?


hilda.

that you are a little--a little mad after all.


solness.

was that what you were thinking of?


hilda.

yes, of all the empty nurseries i slept in.


solness.

[lowers his voice.] we have had children--aline and i.


hilda.

[looks eagerly at him.] have you--?


solness.

two little boys. they were of the same age.


hilda.

twins, then.


solness.

yes, twins. it's eleven or twelve years ago now.


hilda.

[cautiously.] and so both of them--? you have lost both the twins, then?


solness.

[with quiet emotion.] we kept them only about three weeks. or scarcely
so much. [bursts forth.] oh, hilda, i can't tell you what a good thing
it is for me that you have come! for now at last i have some one to talk
to!


hilda.

can you not talk to--her, too?


solness.

not about this. not as i want to talk and must talk. [gloomily.] and not
about so many other things, either.


hilda.

[in a subdued voice.] was that all you meant when you said you need me?


solness.

that was mainly what i meant--at all events, yesterday. for to-day i am
not so sure--[breaking off.] come here and let us sit down, hilda. sit
there on the sofa--so that you can look into the garden. [hilda seats
herself in the corner of the sofa. solness brings a chair closer.]
should you like to hear about it?


hilda.

yes, i shall love to sit and listen to you.


solness.

[sits down.] then i will tell you all about it.


hilda.

now i can see both the garden and you, mr. solness. so now, tell away!
begin!


solness.

[points towards the bow-window.] out there on the rising ground--where
you see the new house--


hilda.

yes?


solness.

aline and i lived there in the first years of our married life. there
was an old house up there that had belonged to her mother; and we
inherited it, and the whole of the great garden with it.


hilda.

was there a tower on that house, too?


solness.

no, nothing of the kind. from the outside it looked like a great, dark,
ugly wooden box; but all the same, it was snug and comfortable enough
inside.


hilda.

then did you pull down the ramshackle old place?


solness.

no, it was burnt down.


hilda.

the whole of it?


solness.

yes.


hilda.

was that a great misfortune for you?


solness.

that depends on how you look at it. as a builder, the fire was the
making of me--


hilda.

well, but--


solness.

it was just after the birth of the two little boys--


hilda.

the poor little twins, yes.


solness.

they came healthy and bonny into the world. and they were growing
too--you could see the difference day to day.


hilda.

little children do grow quickly at first.


solness.

it was the prettiest sight in the world to see aline lying with the two
of them in her arms.--but then came the night of the fire--


hilda.

[excitedly.] what happened? do tell me! was any one burnt?


solness.

no, not that. every one got safe and sound out of the house--


hilda.

well, and what then--?


solness.

the fright had shaken aline terribly. the alarm--the escape--the
break-neck hurry--and then the ice-cold night air--for they had to be
carried out just as they lay--both she and the little ones.


hilda.

was it too much for them?


solness.

oh no, they stood it well enough. but aline fell into a fever, and it
affected her milk. she would insist on nursing them herself; because it
was her duty, she said. and both our little boys, they--[clenching his
hands.]--they--oh!


hilda.

they did not get over that?


solness.

no, that they did not get over. that was how we lost them.


hilda.

it must have been terribly hard for you.


solness.

hard enough for me; but ten time harder for aline. [clenching his hands
in suppressed fury.] oh, that such things should be allowed to happen
here the world! [shortly and firmly.] from the day i lost them, i had no
heart for building churches.


hilda.

did you not like building the church-tower in our town?


solness.

i didn't like it. i know how free and happy i felt when that tower was
finished.


hilda.

_i_ know that, too.


solness.

and now i shall never--never build anything of that sort again! neither
churches nor church-towers.


hilda.

[nods slowly.] nothing but houses for people to live in.


solness.

homes for human beings, hilda.


hilda.

but homes with high towers and pinnacles upon them.


solness.

if possible. [adopts a lighter tone.] but, as i said before, that fire
was the making of me--as a builder, i mean.


hilda.

why don't you call yourself an architect, like the others?


solness.

i have not been systematically enough taught for that. most of what i
know i have found out for myself.


hilda.

but you succeeded all the same.


solness.

yes, thanks to the fire. i laid out almost the whole of the garden in
villa lots; and there i was able to build after my own heart. so i came
to the front with a rush.


hilda.

[looks keenly at him.] you must surely be a very happy man, as matters
stand with you.


solness.

[gloomily.] happy? do you say that, too--like all the rest of them?


hilda.

yes, i should say you must be. if you could only cease thing about the
two little children--


solness.

[slowly.] the two little children--they are not so easy to forget,
hilda.


hilda.

[somewhat uncertainly.] do you still feel their loss so much--after all
these years?


solness.

[looks fixedly at her, without replying.] a happy man you said--


hilda.

well, now, are you not happy--in other respects?


solness.

[continues to look at her.] when i told you all this about the
fire--h'm--


hilda.

well?


solness.

was there not one special thought that you--that you seized upon?


hilda.

[reflects in vain.] no. what thought should that be?


solness.

[with subdued emphasis.] it was simply and solely by that fire that i
was enabled to build homes for human beings. cosy, comfortable, bright
homes, where father and mother and the whole troop of children can live
in safety and gladness, feeling what a happy thing it is to be alive in
the world--and most of all to belong to each other--in great things and
in small.


hilda.

[ardently.] well, and is it not a great happiness for you to be able to
build such beautiful homes?


solness.

the price, hilda! the terrible price i had to pay for the opportunity!


hilda.

but can you never get over that?


solness.

no. that i might build homes for others, i had to forego--to forego
for all time--the home that might have been my own. i mean a home for a
troop of children--and for father and mother, too.


hilda.

[cautiously.] but need you have done that? for all time, you say?


solness.

[nods slowly.] that was the price of this happiness that people talk
about. [breathes heavily.] this happiness--h'm--this happiness was not
to be bought any cheaper, hilda.


hilda.

[as before.] but may it not come right even yet?


solness.

never in this world--never. that is another consequence of the fire--and
of aline's illness afterwards.


hilda.

[looks at him with an indefinable expression.] and yet you build all
these nurseries.


solness.

[seriously.] have you never noticed, hilda, how the impossible--how it
seems to beckon and cry aloud to one?


hilda.

[reflecting.] the impossible? [with animation.] yes, indeed! is that how
you feel too?


solness.

yes, i do.


hilda.

then there must be--a little of the troll in you too.


solness.

why of the troll?


hilda.

what would you call it, then?


solness.

[rises.] well, well, perhaps you are right. [vehemently.] but how can
i help turning into a troll, when this is how it always goes with me in
everything--in everything!


hilda.

how do you mean?


solness.

[speaking low, with inward emotion.] mark what i say to you, hilda.
all that i have succeeded in doing, building, creating--all the beauty,
security, cheerful comfort--ay, and magnificence too--[clenches his
hands.] oh, is it not terrible even to think of--?


hilda.

what is so terrible?


solness.

that all this i have to make up for, to pay for--not in money, but in
human happiness. and not with my own happiness only, but with other
people's too. yes, yes, do you see that, hilda? that is the price which
my position as an artist has cost me--and others. and every single day
i have to look on while the price is paid for me anew. over again, and
over again--and over again for ever!


hilda.

[rises and looks steadily at him.] now i can see that you are thinking
of--of her.


solness.

yes, mainly of aline. for aline--she, too, had her vocation in life,
just as much as i had mine. [his voice quivers.] but her vocation has
had to be stunted, and crushed, and shattered--in order that mine might
force its way to--to a sort of great victory. for you must know that
aline--she, too, had a talent for building.


hilda.

she! for building?


solness.

[shakes his head.] not houses and towers, and spires--not such things as
i work away at--


hilda.

well, but what then?


solness.

[softly, with emotion.] for building up the souls of little children,
hilda. for building up children's souls in perfect balance, and in
noble and beautiful forms. for enabling them to soar up into erect and
full-grown human souls. that was aline's talent. and there it all
lies now--unused and unusable for ever--of no earthly service to any
one--just like the ruins left by a fire.


hilda.

yes, but even if this were so--?


solness.

it is so! it is so! i know it!


hilda.

well, but in any case it is not your fault.


solness.

[fixes his eyes on her, and nods slowly.] ah, that is the great, the
terrible question. that is the doubt that is gnawing me--night and day.


hilda.

that?


solness.

yes. suppose the fault was mine--in a certain sense.


hilda.

your fault! the fire!


solness.

all of it; the whole thing. and yet, perhaps--i may not have had
anything to do with it.


hilda.

[looks at him with a troubled expression.] oh, mr. solness--if you can
talk like that, i am afraid you must be--ill after all.


solness.

h'm--i don't think i shall ever be of quite sound mind on that point.


  ragnar brovik cautiously opens the little door in the left-
  hand corner.  hilda comes forward.


ragnar.

[when he sees hilda.] oh. i beg pardon, mr. solness---- [he makes a
movement to withdraw.


solness.

no, no, don't go. let us get it over.


ragnar.

oh, yes--if only we could.


solness.

i hear your father is no better?


ragnar.

father is fast growing weaker--and therefore i beg and implore you to
write a few kind words for me on one of the plans! something for father
to read before he--


solness.

[vehemently.] i won't hear anything more about those drawings of yours!


ragnar.

have you looked at them?


solness.

yes--i have.


ragnar.

and they are good for nothing? and _i_ am good for nothing, too?


solness.

[evasively.] stay here with me, ragnar. you shall have everything your
own way. and then you can marry kaia, and live at your ease--and happily
too, who knows? only don't think of building on your own account.


ragnar.

well, well, then i must go home and tell father what you say--i promised
i would.--is this what i am to tell father--before he dies?


solness.

[with a groan.] oh tell him--tell him what you will, for me. best to say
nothing at all to him! [with a sudden outburst.] i cannot do anything
else, ragnar!


ragnar.

may i have the drawings to take with me?


solness.

yes, take them--take them by all means! they are lying there on the
table.


ragnar.

[goes to the table.] thanks.


hilda.

[puts her hand on the portfolio.] no, no; leave them here.


solness.

why?


hilda.

because i want to look at them, too.


solness.

but you have been---- [to ragnar.] well, leave them here, then.


ragnar.

very well.


solness.

and go home at once to your father.


ragnar.

yes, i suppose i must.


solness.

[as if in desperation.] ragnar--you must not ask me to do what is beyond
my power! do you hear, ragnar? you must not!


ragnar.

no, no. i beg you pardon--

     [he bows, and goes out by the corner door.  hilda goes over and
       sits down on a chair near the mirror.


hilda.

[looks angrily at solness.] that was a very ugly thing to do.


solness.

do you think so, too?


hilda.

yes, it was horribly ugly--and hard and bad and cruel as well.


solness.

oh, you don't understand my position.


hilda.

no matter--. i say you ought not to be like that.


solness.

you said yourself, only just now, that no one but _i_ ought to be
allowed to build.


hilda.

_i_ may say such things--but you must not.


solness.

i most of all, surely, who have paid so dear for my position.


hilda.

oh yes--with what you call domestic comfort--and that sort of thing.


solness.

and with my peace of soul into the bargain.


hilda.

[rising.] peace of soul! [with feeling.] yes, yes, you are right in
that! poor mr. solness--you fancy that--


solness.

[with a quiet, chuckling laugh.] just sit down again, hilda, and i'll
tell you something funny.


hilda.

[sits down; with intent interest.] well?


solness.

it sounds such a ludicrous little thing; for, you see, the whole story
turns upon nothing but a crack in the chimney.


hilda.

no more than that?


solness.

no, not to begin with.

     [he moves a chair nearer to hilda and sits down.


hilda.

[impatiently, taps on her knee.] well, now for the crack in the chimney!


solness.

i had noticed the split in the flue long, long before the fire. every
time i went up into the attic, i looked to see if it was still there.


hilda.

and it was?


solness.

yes; for no one else knew about it.


hilda.

and you said nothing?


solness.

nothing.


hilda.

and did not think of repairing the flue either?


solness.

oh yes, i thought about it--but never got any further. every time i
intended to set to work, it seemed just as if a hand held me back. not
to-day, i thought--to-morrow; and nothing ever came of it.


hilda.

but why did you keep putting it off like that?


solness.

because i was revolving something in my mind. [slowly, and in a low
voice.] through that little black crack in the chimney, i might,
perhaps, force my way upwards--as a builder.


hilda.

[looking straight in front of her.] that must have been thrilling.


solness.

almost irresistible--quite irresistible. for at that time it appeared
to me a perfectly simple and straightforward matter. i would have had
it happen in the winter-time--a little before midday. i was to be out
driving aline in the sleigh. the servants at home would have made huge
fires in the stoves.


hilda.

for, of course, it was to be bitterly cold that day?


solness.

rather biting, yes--and they would want aline to find it thoroughly snug
and warm when she came home.


hilda.

i suppose she is very chilly by nature?


solness.

she is. and as we drove home, we were to see the smoke.


hilda.

only the smoke?


solness.

the smoke first. but when we came up to the garden gate, the whole of
the old timber-box was to be a rolling mass of flames.--that is how i
wanted it to be, you see.


hilda.

oh, why, why could it not have happened so!


solness.

you may well say that, hilda.


hilda.

well, but now listen, mr. solness. are you perfectly certain that the
fire was caused by that little crack in the chimney!


solness.

no, on the contrary--i am perfectly certain that the crack in the
chimney had nothing whatever to do with the fire.


hilda.

what!


solness.

it has been clearly ascertained that the fire broke out in a
clothes-cupboard--in a totally different part of the house.


hilda.

then what is all this nonsense you are talking about the crack in the
chimney!


solness.

may i go on talking to you a little, hilda?


hilda.

yes, if you'll only talk sensibly--


solness.

i will try to. [he moves his chair nearer.


hilda.

out with it, then, mr. solness.


solness.

[confidentially.] don't you agree with me, hilda, that there exist
special, chosen people who have been endowed with the power and
faculty if desiring a thing, craving for a thing, willing a thing--so
persistently and so--so inexorably--that at last it has to happen? don't
you believe that?


hilda.

[with an indefinable expression in her eyes.] if that is so, we shall
see, one of these days, whether _i_ am one of the chosen.


solness.

it is not one's self alone that can do such great things. oh, no--the
helpers and the servers--they must do their part too, if it is to be of
any good. but they never come of themselves. one has to call upon them
very persistently--inwardly, you understand.


hilda.

what are these helpers and servers?


solness.

oh, we can talk about that some other time. for the present, let us keep
to this business of the fire.


hilda.

don't you think that fire would have happened all the same--even without
your wishing for it?


solness.

if the house had been old knut brovik's, it would never have burnt down
so conveniently for him. i am sure of that; for he does not know how
to call for the helpers--no, nor for the servers, either. [rises in
unrest.] so you see, hilda--it is my fault, after all, that the lives of
the two little boys had to be sacrificed. and do you think it is not
my fault, too, that aline has never been the woman she should and might
have been--and that she most longed to be?


hilda.

yes, but if it is all the work of these helpers and servers--?


solness.

who called for the helpers and servers? it was i! and they came and
obeyed my will. [in increasing excitement.] that is what people call
having the luck on your side; but i must tell you what this sort of luck
feels like! it feels like a great raw place here on my breast. and the
helpers and servers keep on flaying pieces of skin off other people in
order to close my sore!--but still the sore is not healed--never, never!
oh, if you knew how it can sometimes gnaw and burn!


hilda.

[looks attentively at him.] you are ill, mr. solness. very ill, i almost
think.


solness.

say mad; for that is what you mean.


hilda.

no, i don't think there is much amiss with your intellect.


solness.

with what then? out with it!


hilda.

i wonder whether you were not sent into the world with a sickly
conscience.


solness.

a sickly conscience? what devilry is that?


hilda.

i mean that your conscience is feeble--too delicately built, as it
were--hasn't strength to take a grip of things--to lift and bear what is
heavy.


solness.

[growls.] h'm! may i ask, then, what sort of a conscience one ought to
have?


hilda.

i should like your conscience to be--to be thoroughly robust.


solness.

indeed? robust, eh? is your own conscience robust, may i ask?


hilda.

yes, i think it is. i have never noticed that it wasn't.


solness.

it has not been put very severely to the test, i should think.


hilda.

[with a quivering of the lips.] oh, it was no such simple matter to
leave father--i am so awfully fond of him.


solness.

dear me! for a month or two--


hilda.

i think i shall never go home again.


solness.

never? then why did you leave him?


hilda.

[half-seriously, half-banteringly.] have you forgotten again that the
ten year are up?


solness.

oh nonsense. was anything wrong at home? eh?


hilda.

[quite seriously.] it was this impulse within me that urged and goaded
me to come--and lured and drew me on, as well.


solness.

[eagerly.] there we have it! there we have it, hilda! there is the troll
in you too, as in me. for it's the troll in one, you see--it is that
that calls to the powers outside us. and then you must give in--whether
you will or no.


hilda.

i almost think you are right, mr. solness.


solness.

[walks about the room.] oh, there are devils innumerable abroad in the
world, hilda, that one never sees.


hilda.

devils, too?


solness.

[stops.] good devils and bad devils; light-haired devils and
black-haired devils. if only you could always tell whether it is the
light or dark ones that have got hold of you! [paces about.] ho-ho! then
it would be simple enough!


hilda.

[follows him with her eyes.] or if one had a really vigorous, radiantly
healthy conscience--so that one dared to do what one would.


solness.

[stops beside the console table.] i believe, now, that most people are
just as puny creatures as i am in that respect.


hilda.

i shouldn't wonder.


solness.

[leaning against the table.] in the sagas--. have you read any of the
old sagas?


hilda.

oh yes! when i used to read books, i--


solness.

in the sagas you read about vikings, who sailed to foreign lands, and
plundered and burned and killed men--


hilda.

and carried off women--


solness. --and kept them in captivity--


hilda. --took them home in their ships--


solness. --and behaved to them like--like the very worst of trolls.


hilda.

[looks straight before her, with a half-veiled look.] i think that must
have been thrilling.


solness.

[with a short, deep laugh.] to carry off women, eh?


hilda.

to be carried off.


solness.

[looks at her a moment.] oh, indeed.


hilda.

[as if breaking the thread of the conversation.] but what made you speak
of these vikings, mr. solness?


solness.

why, those fellows must have had robust consciences, if you like!
when they got home again, they could eat and drink, and be as happy as
children. and the women, too! they often would not leave them on any
account. can you understand that, hilda?


hilda.

those women i can understand exceedingly well.


solness.

oho! perhaps you could do the same yourself?


hilda.

why not?


solness.

live--of your own free will--with a ruffian like that?


hilda.

if it was a ruffian i had come to love--


solness.

could you come to love a man like that?


hilda.

good heavens, you know very well one can't choose whom one is going to
love.


solness.

[looks meditatively at her.] oh no, i suppose it is the troll within one
that's responsible for that.


hilda.

[half-laughing.] and all those blessed devils, that you know so
well--both the light-haired and the dark-haired ones.


solness.

[quietly and warmly.] then i hope with all my heart that the devils will
choose carefully for you, hilda.


hilda.

for me they have chosen already--once and for all.


solness.

[looks earnestly at her.] hilda--you are like a wild bird of the woods.


hilda.

far from it. i don't hide myself away under the bushes.


solness.

no, no. there is rather something of the bird of prey in you.


hilda.

that is nearer it--perhaps. [very vehemently.] and why not a bird of
prey? why should not _i_ go a-hunting--i, as well as the rest? carry off
the prey i want--if only i can get my claws into it, and do with it as i
will.


solness.

hilda--do you know what you are?


hilda.

yes, i suppose i am a strange sort of bird.


solness.

no. you are like a dawning day. when i look at you--i seem to be looking
towards the sunrise.


hilda.

tell me, mr. solness--are you certain that you have never called me to
you? inwardly, you know?


solness.

[softly and slowly.] i almost think i must have.


hilda.

what did you want with me?


solness.

you are the younger generation, hilda.


hilda.

[smiles.] that younger generation that you are so afraid of?


solness.

[nods slowly.] and which, in my heart, i yearn towards so deeply.

     [hilda rises, goes to the little table, and fetches ragnar
       brovik's portfolio.


hilda.

[holds out the portfolio to him.] we were talking of these drawings--


solness.

[shortly, waving them away.] put those things away! i have seen enough
of them.


hilda.

yes, but you have to write your approval on them.


solness.

write my approval on them? never!


hilda.

but the poor old man is lying at death's door! can't you give him and
his son this pleasure before they are parted? and perhaps he might get
the commission to carry them out, too.


solness.

yes, that is just what he would get. he has made sure of that--has my
fine gentleman!


hilda.

then, good heavens--if that is so--can't you tell the least little bit
of a lie for once in a way?


solness.

a lie? [raging.] hilda--take those devil's drawings out of my sight!


hilda.

[draws the portfolio a little nearer to herself.] well, well,
well--don't bite me.--you talk of trolls--but i think you go on like a
troll yourself. [looks round.] where do you keep your pen and ink?


solness.

there is nothing of the sort in here.


hilda.

[goes towards the door.] but in the office where that young lady is--


solness.

stay where you are, hilda!--i ought to tell a lie, you say. oh yes, for
the sake of his old father i might well do that--for in my time i have
crushed him, trodden him under foot--


hilda.

him, too?


solness.

i needed room for myself. but this ragnar--he must on no account be
allowed to come to the front.


hilda.

poor fellow, there is surely no fear of that. if he has nothing in him--


solness.

[comes closer, looks at her, and whispers.] if ragnar brovik gets his
chance, he will strike me to the earth. crush me--as i crushed his
father.


hilda.

crush you? has he the ability for that?


solness.

yes, you may depend upon it he has the ability! he is the younger
generation that stands ready to knock at my door--to make an end of
halvard solness.


hilda.

[looks at him with quiet reproach.] and yet you would bar him out. fie,
mr. solness!


solness.

the fight i have been fighting has cost heart's blood enough.--and i am
afraid, too, that the helpers and servers will not obey me any longer.


hilda.

then you must go ahead without them. there is nothing else for it.


solness.

it is hopeless, hilda. the luck is bound to turn. a little sooner or a
little later. retribution is inexorable.


hilda.

[in distress, putting her hands over her ears.] don't talk like that! do
you want to kill me? to take from me what is more than my life?


solness.

and what is that?


hilda.

the longing to see you great. to see you, with a wreath in your hand,
high, high up upon a church-tower. [calm again.] come, out with your
pencil now. you must have a pencil about you?


solness.

[takes out his pocket-book.] i have one here.


hilda.

[lays the portfolio on the sofa-table.] very well. now let us two sit
down here, mr. solness. [solness seats himself at the table. hilda
stands behind him, leaning over the back of the chair.] and now we
well write on the drawings. we must write very, very nicely and
cordially--for this horrid ruar--or whatever his name is.


solness.

[writes a few words, turns his head and looks at her.] tell me one
thing, hilda.


hilda.

yes!


solness.

if you have been waiting for me all these ten years--


hilda.

what then?


solness.

why have you never written to me? then i could have answered you.


hilda.

[hastily.] no, no, no! that was just what i did not want.


solness.

why not?


hilda.

i was afraid the whole thing might fall to pieces.--but we were going to
write on the drawings, mr. solness.


solness.

so we were.


hilda.

[bends forward and looks over his shoulder while he writes.] mind now,
kindly and cordially! oh how i hate--how i hate this ruald--


solness.

[writing.] have you never really cared for any one, hilda?


hilda.

for any one else, i suppose you mean?


solness.

[looks up at her.] for any one else, yes. have you never? in all these
ten years? never?


hilda.

oh yes, now and then. when i was perfectly furious with you for not
coming.


solness.

then you did take an interest in other people, too?


hilda.

a little bit--for a week or so. good heavens, mr. solness, you surely
know how such things come about.


solness.

hilda--what is it you have come for?


hilda.

don't waste time talking. the poor old man might go and die in the
meantime.


solness.

answer me, hilda. what do you want of me?


hilda.

i want my kingdom.


solness.

h'm--


  he gives a rapid glance toward the door on the left, and
  then goes on writing on the drawings.  at the same moment
  mrs. solness enters.


mrs. solness.

here are a few things i have got for you, miss wangel. the large parcels
will be sent later on.


hilda.

oh, how very, very kind of you!


mrs. solness.

only my simple duty. nothing more than that.


solness.

[reading over what he has written.] aline!


mrs. solness.

yes?


solness.

did you notice whether the--the book-keeper was out there?


mrs. solness.

yes, of course, she was there.


solness.

[puts the drawings in the portfolio.] h'm--


mrs. solness.

she was standing at the desk, as she always is--when _i_ go through the
room.


solness.

[rises.] then i'll give this to her and tell her that--


hilda.

[takes the portfolio from him.] oh, no, let me have the pleasure of
doing that! [goes to the door, but turns.] what is her name?


solness.

her name is miss fosli.


hilda.

pooh, that sounds so cold! her christian name, i mean?


solness.

kaia--i believe.


hilda.

[opens the door and calls out.] kaia, come in here! make haste! mr.
solness wants to speak to you.


  kaia fosli appears at the door.


kaia.

[looking at him in alarm.] here i am--?



hilda.

[handing her the portfolio.] see her, kaia! you can take this home; mr.
solness was written on them now.


kaia.

oh, at last!


solness.

give them to the old man as soon as you can.


kaia.

i will go straight home with them.


solness.

yes, do. now ragnar will have a chance of building for himself.


kaia.

oh, may he come and thank you for all--?


solness.

[harshly.] i won't have any thanks! tell him that from me.


kaia.

yes, i will--


solness.

and tell him at the same time that henceforward i do not require his
services--nor yours either.


kaia.

[softly and quiveringly.] not mine either?


solness.

you will have other things to think of now, and to attend to; and that
is a very good thing for you. well, go home with the drawings now, miss
fosli. at once! do you hear?


kaia.

[as before.] yes, mr. solness. [she goes out.


mrs. solness.

heavens! what deceitful eyes she has.


solness.

she? that poor little creature?


mrs. solness.

oh--i can see what i can see, halvard.----are you really dismissing
them?


solness.

yes.


mrs. solness.

her as well?


solness.

was not that what you wished?


mrs. solness.

but how can you get on without her--? oh well, no doubt you have some
one else in reserve, halvard.


hilda.

[playfully.] well, _i_ for one am not the person to stand at a desk.


solness.

never mind, never mind--it will be all right, aline. now all you have to
do is think about moving into our new home--as quickly as you can. this
evening we will hang up the wreath--[turns to hilda.] what do you say to
that, miss hilda?


hilda.

[looks at him with sparkling eyes.] it will be splendid to see you so
high up once more.


solness.

me!


mrs. solness.

for heaven's sake, miss wangel, don't imagine such a thing! my
husband!--when he always gets so dizzy!


hilda.

he get dizzy! no, i know quite well he does not!


mrs. solness.

oh yes, indeed he does.


hilda.

but i have seen him with my own eyes right up at the top of a high
church-tower!


mrs. solness.

yes, i hear people talk of that; but it is utterly impossible--


solness.

[vehemently.] impossible--impossible, yes! but there i stood all the
same!


mrs. solness.

o, how can you say so, halvard? why, you can't even bear to go out on
the second-storey balcony here. you have always been like that.


solness.

you may perhaps see something different this evening.


mrs. solness.

[in alarm.] no, no, no! please god i shall never see that. i will write
at once to the doctor--and i am sure he won't let you do it.


solness.

why, aline--!


mrs. solness.

oh, you know you're ill, halvard. this proves it! oh god--oh god!

     [she goes hastily out to the right.


hilda.

[looks intently at him.] is it so, or is it not?


solness.

that i turn dizzy?


hilda.

that my master builder dares not--cannot--climb as high as he builds?


solness.

is that the way you look at it?


hilda.

yes.


solness.

i believe there is scarcely a corner in me that is safe from you.


hilda.

[looks towards the bow-window.] up there, then. right up there--


solness.

[approaches her.] you might have the topmost room in the tower,
hilda--there you might live like a princess.


hilda.

[indefinably, between earnest and jest.] yes, that is what you promised
me.


solness.

did i really?


hilda.

fie, mr. solness! you said i should be a princess, and that you would
give me a kingdom. and then you went and--well!


solness.

[cautiously.] are you quite certain that this is not a dream--a fancy,
that has fixed itself in your mind?


hilda.

[sharply.] do you mean that you did not do it?


solness.

i scarcely know myself. [more softly.] but now i know so much for
certain, that i--


hilda.

that you--? say it at once!


solness. --that i ought to have done it.


hilda.

[exclaims with animation.] don't tell me you can ever be dizzy!


solness.

this evening, then, we will hang up the wreath--princess hilda.


hilda.

[with a bitter curve of the lips.] over your new home, yes.


solness.

over the new house, which will never be a home for me.

     [he goes out through the garden door.


hilda.

[looks straight in front of her with a far-away expression, and whispers
to herself. the only words audible are:]--frightfully thrilling--




act third.

  the large broad verandah of solness's dwelling-house.  part
  of the house, with outer door leading to the verandah, is
  seen to the left.  a railing along the verandah to the right.
  at the back, from the end of the verandah, a flight of steps
  leads down to the garden below.  tall old trees in the
  garden spread their branches over the verandah and towards
  the house.  far to the right, in among the trees, a glimpse
  is caught of the lower part of the new villa, with scaffolding
  round so much as is seen of the tower.  in the background
  the garden is bounded by an old wooden fence.  outside the
  fence, a street with low, tumble-down cottages.

  evening sky with sun-lit clouds.

  on the verandah, a garden bench stands along the wall of the
  house, and in front of the bench a long table.  on the other
  side of the table, an arm-chair and some stools.  all the
  furniture is of wicker-work.

  mrs. solness, wrapped in a large white crepe shawl, sits
  resting in the arm-chair and gazes over to the right.
  shortly after, hilda wangel comes up the flight of steps
  from the garden.  she is dressed as in the last act, and
  wears her hat.  she has in her bodice a little nosegay of
  small common flowers.


mrs. solness.

[turning her head a little.] have you been round the garden, miss
wangel?


hilda.

yes, i have been taking a look at it.


mrs. solness.

and found some flowers too, i see.


hilda.

yes, indeed! there are such heaps of them in among the bushes.


mrs. solness.

are there, really? still? you see i scarcely ever go there.


hilda.

[closer.] what! don't you take a run down into the garden every day,
then?


mrs. solness.

[with a faint smile.] i don't "run" anywhere, nowadays.


hilda.

well, but do you not go down now and then to look at all the lovely
things there?


mrs. solness.

it has all become so strange to me. i am almost afraid to see it again.


hilda.

your own garden!


mrs. solness.

i don't feel that it is mine any longer.


hilda.

what do you mean--?


mrs. solness.

no, no, it is not--not as it was in my mother's and father's time. they
have taken away so much--so much of the garden, miss wangel. fancy--they
have parcelled it out--and built houses for strangers--people that i
don't know. and they can sit and look in upon me from their windows.


hilda.

[with a bright expression.] mrs. solness!


mrs. solness.

yes?


hilda.

may i stay here with you a little?


mrs. solness.

yes, by all means, if you care to.

     [hilda moves a stool close to the arm-chair and sits down.


hilda.

ah--here one can sit and sun oneself like a cat.


mrs. solness.

[lays her hand softly on hilda's neck.] it is nice of you to be willing
to sit with me. i thought you wanted to go in to my husband.


hilda.

what should i want with him?


mrs. solness.

to help him, i thought.


hilda.

no, thank you. and besides, he is not in. he is over there with his
workmen. but he looked so fierce that i did not dare to talk to him.


mrs. solness.

he is so kind and gentle in reality.


hilda.

he!


mrs. solness.

you do not really know him yet, miss wangel.


hilda.

[looks affectionately at her.] are you pleased at the thought of moving
over to the new house?


mrs. solness.

i ought to be pleased; for it is what halvard wants--


hilda.

oh, not just on that account, surely?


mrs. solness.

yes, yes, miss wangel; for it is only my duty to submit myself to
him. but very often it is dreadfully difficult to force one's mind to
obedience.


hilda.

yes, that must be difficult indeed.


mrs. solness.

i can tell you it is--when one has so many faults as i have--


hilda.

when one has gone through so much trouble as you have--


mrs. solness.

how do you know about that?


hilda.

your husband told me.


mrs. solness.

to me he very seldom mentions these things.--yes, i can tell you i have
gone through more than enough trouble in my life, miss wangel.


hilda.

[looks sympathetically at her and nods slowly.] poor mrs. solness. first
of all there was the fire--


mrs. solness.

[with a sigh.] yes, everything that was mine was burnt.


hilda.

and then came what was worse.


mrs. solness.

[looking inquiringly at her.] worse?


hilda.

the worst of all.


mrs. solness.

what do you mean?


hilda.

[softly.] you lost the two little boys.


mrs. solness.

oh, yes, the boys. but, you see, that was a thing apart. that was a
dispensation of providence; and in such things one can only bow in
submission--yes, and be thankful, too.


hilda.

then you are so?


mrs. solness.

not always, i am sorry to say. i know well enough that it is my
duty--but all the same i cannot.


hilda.

no, no, i think that is only natural.


mrs. solness.

and often and often i have to remind myself that it was a righteous
punishment for me--


hilda.

why?


mrs. solness.

because i had not fortitude enough in misfortune.


hilda.

but i don't see that--


mrs. solness.

oh, no, no, miss wangel--do not talk to me any more about the two little
boys. we ought to feel nothing but joy in thinking of them; for they are
so happy--so happy now. no, it is the small losses in life that cut
one to the heart--the loss of all that other people look upon as almost
nothing.


hilda.

[lays her arms on mrs. solness's knees, and looks up at her
affectionately.] dear mrs. solness--tell me what things you mean!


mrs. solness.

as i say, only little things. all the old portraits were burnt on the
walls. and all the old silk dresses were burnt, what had belonged to
the family for generations and generations. and all mother's and
grandmother's lace--that was burnt, too. and only think--the jewels,
too! [sadly.] and then all the dolls.


hilda.

the dolls?


mrs. solness.

[choking with tears.] i had nine lovely dolls.


hilda.

and they were burnt too?


mrs. solness.

all of them. oh, it was hard--so hard for me.


hilda.

had you put by all these dolls, then? ever since you were little?


mrs. solness.

i had not put them by. the dolls and i had gone on living together.


hilda.

after you were grown up?


mrs. solness.

yes, long after that.


hilda.

after you were married, too?


mrs. solness.

oh yes, indeed. so long as he did not see it--. but they were all burnt
up, poor things. no one thought of saving them. oh, it is so miserable
to think of. you mustn't laugh at me, miss wangel.


hilda.

i am not laughing in the least.


mrs. solness.

for you see, in a certain sense, there was life in them, too. i carried
them under my heart--like little unborn children.


  dr. herdal, with his hat in his hand, comes out through the
  door, and observes mrs. solness. and hilda.


dr. herdal.

well, mrs. solness, so you are sitting out here catching cold?


mrs. solness.

i find it so pleasant and warm here to-day.


dr. herdal.

yes, yes. but is there anything going on here? i got a note from you.


mrs. solness.

[rises.] yes, there is something i must talk to you about.


dr. herdal.

very well; then perhaps we better go in. [to hilda.] still in your
mountaineering dress, miss wangel?


hilda.

[gaily, rising.] yes--in full uniform! but to-day i am not going
climbing and breaking my neck. we two will stop quietly below and look
on, doctor.


dr. herdal.

what are we to look on at?


mrs. solness.

[softly, in alarm, to hilda.] hush, hush--for god's sake! he is coming!
try to get that idea out of his head. and let us be friends, miss
wangel. don't you think we can?


hilda.

[throws her arms impetuously round mrs. solness's neck.] oh, if we only
could!


mrs. solness.

[gently disengages herself.] there, there, there! there he comes,
doctor. let me have a word with you.


dr. herdal.

is it about him?


mrs. solness.

yes, to be sure it's about him. do come in.


  she and the doctor enter the house.  next moment solness
  comes up from the garden by the flight of steps.  a serious
  look comes over hilda's face.


solness.

[glances at the house-door, which is closed cautiously from within.]
have you noticed, hilda, that as soon as i come, she goes?


hilda.

i have noticed that as soon as you come, you make her go.


solness.

perhaps so. but i cannot help it. [looks observantly at her.] are you
cold, hilda? i think you look cold.


hilda.

i have just come up out of a tomb.


solness.

what do you mean by that?


hilda.

that i have got chilled through and through, mr. solness.


solness.

[slowly.] i believe i understand--


hilda.

what brings you up here just now?


solness.

i caught sight of you from over there.


hilda.

but then you must have seen her too?


solness.

i knew she would go at once if i came.


hilda.

is it very painful for you that she should avoid you in this way?


solness.

in one sense, it's a relief as well.


hilda.

not to have her before your eyes?


solness.

yes.


hilda.

not to be always seeing how heavily the loss of the little boys weighs
upon her?


solness.

yes. chiefly that.

     [hilda drifts across the verandah with her hands behind her
       back, stops at the railing and looks out over the garden.


solness.

[after a short pause.] did you have a long talk with her?

     [hilda stands motionless and does not answer.


solness.

had you a long talk, i asked? [hilda is silent as before.


solness.

what was she talking about, hilda? [hilda continues silent.


solness.

poor aline! i suppose it was about the little boys.


hilda.



     [a nervous shudder runs through her; then she nods hurriedly
       once or twice.


solness.

she will never get over it--never in this world. [approaches her.]
now you are standing there again like a statue; just as you stood last
night.


hilda.

[turns and looks at him, with great serious eyes.] i am going away.


solness.

[sharply.] going away!


hilda.

yes.


solness.

but i won't allow you to!


hilda.

what am i to do here now?


solness.

simply to be here, hilda!


hilda.

[measures him with a look.] oh, thank you. you know it wouldn't end
there.


solness.

[heedlessly.] so much the better!


hilda.

[vehemently.] i cannot do any harm to one whom i know! i can't take away
anything that belongs to her.


solness.

who wants you to do that?


hilda.

[continuing.] a stranger, yes! for that is quite a different thing! a
person i have never set eyes on. but one that i have come into close
contact with--! oh no! oh no! ugh!


solness.

yes, but i never proposed you should.


hilda.

oh, mr. solness, you know quite well what the end of it would be. and
that is why i am going away.


solness.

and what is to become of me when you are gone? what shall i have to live
for then?--after that?


hilda.

[with the indefinable look in her eyes.] it is surely not so hard for
you. you have your duties to her. live for those duties.


solness.

too late. these powers--these--these--


hilda. --devils--


solness.

yes, these devils! and the troll within me as well--they have drawn all
the life-blood out of her. [laughs in desperation.] they did it for my
happiness! yes, yes! [sadly.] and now she is dead--for my sake. and i
am chained alive to a dead woman. [in wild anguish.] _i_--_i_ who cannot
live without joy in life!

     [hilda moves round the table and seats herself on the bench,
       with her elbows on the table, and her head supported by her
       hands.


hilda.

[sits and looks at him awhile.] what will you build next?


solness.

[shakes his head.] i don't believe i shall build much more.


hilda.

not those cosy, happy homes for mother and father, and for the troop of
children?


solness.

i wonder whether there will be any use for such homes in the coming
time.


hilda.

poor mr. solness! and you have gone all these ten years--and staked your
whole life--on that alone.


solness.

yes, you may well say so, hilda.


hilda.

[with an outburst.] oh, it all seems to me so foolish--so foolish!


solness.

all what?


hilda.

not to be able to grasp at your own happiness--at your own life! merely
because some one you know happens to stand in the way!


solness.

one whom you have no right to set aside.


hilda.

i wonder whether one really has not the right! and yet, and yet--. oh!
if one could only sleep the whole thing away!

     [she lays her arms flat don on the table, rests the left side of
       her head on her hands, and shuts her eyes.



solness.

[turns the arm-chair and sits down at the table.] had you a cosy, happy
home--up there with your father, hilda?


hilda.

[without stirring, answers as if half asleep.] i had only a cage.


solness.

and you are determined not to go back to it?


hilda.

[as before.] the wild bird never wants to go back to the cage.


solness.

rather range through the free air--


hilda.

[still as before.] the bird of prey loves to range--


solness.

[lets his eyes rest on her.] if only one had the viking-spirit in life--


hilda.

[in her usual voice; opens her eyes but does not move.] and the other
thing? say what that was!


solness.

a robust conscience.

     [hilda sits erect on the bench, with animation.  her eyes have
       once more the sparkling expression of gladness.


hilda.

[nods to him.] _i_ know what you are going to build next!


solness.

then you know more than i do, hilda.


hilda.

yes, builders are such stupid people.


solness.

what is it to be then?


hilda.

[nods again.] the castle.


solness.

what castle?


hilda.

my castle, of course.


solness.

do you want a castle now?


hilda.

don't you owe me a kingdom, i should like to know?


solness.

you say i do.


hilda.

well--you admit you owe me this kingdom. and you can't have a kingdom
without a royal castle, i should think.


solness.

[more and more animated.] yes, they usually go together.


hilda.

good! then build it for me! this moment!


solness.

[laughing.] must you have that on the instant, too?


hilda.

yes, to be sure! for the ten years are up now, and i am not going to
wait any longer. so--out with the castle, mr. solness!


solness.

it's no light matter to owe you anything, hilda.


hilda.

you should have thought of that before. it is too late now. so--[tapping
the table]--the castle on the table! it is my castle! i will have it at
once!


solness.

[more seriously, leans over towards her, with his arms on the table.]
what sort of castle have you imagined, hilda?

     [her expression becomes more and more veiled.  she seems gazing
       inwards at herself.


hilda.

[slowly.] my castle shall stand on a height--on a very great
height--with a clear outlook on all sides, so that i can see far--far
around.


solness.

and no doubt it is to have a high tower!


hilda.

a tremendously high tower. and at the very top of the tower there shall
be a balcony. and i will stand out upon it--


solness.

[involuntarily clutches at his forehead.] how can you like to stand at
such a dizzy height--?


hilda.

yes, i will! right up there will i stand and look down on the other
people--on those that are building churches, and homes for mother and
father and the troop of children. and you may come up and look on at it,
too.


solness.

[in a low tone.] is the builder to be allowed to come up beside the
princess?


hilda.

if the builder will.


solness.

[more softly.] then i think the builder will come.


hilda.

[nods.] the builder--he will come.


solness.

but he will never be able to build any more. poor builder!


hilda.

[animated.] oh, yes, he will! we two will set to work together. and then
we will build the loveliest--the very loveliest--thing in all the world.


solness.

[intently.] hilda--tell me what that is!


hilda.

[looks smilingly at him, shakes her head a little, pouts, and speaks as
if to a child.] builders--they are such very--very stupid people.


solness.

yes, no doubt they are stupid. but now tell me what it is--the loveliest
thing in the world--that we two are to build together?


hilda.

[is silent a little while, then says with an indefinable expression in
her eyes.] castles in the air.


solness.

castles in the air?


hilda.

[nods.] castles in the air, yes! do you know what sort of thing a castle
in the air is?


solness.

it is the loveliest thing in the world, you say.


hilda.

[rises with vehemence, and makes a gesture of repulsion with her hand.]
yes, to be sure it is! castles in the air--they are so easy to build,
too--[looks scornfully at him]--especially for the builders who have
a--a dizzy conscience.


solness.

[rises.] after this day we two will build together, hilda.


hilda.

[with a half-dubious smile.] a real castle in the air?


solness.

yes. one with a firm foundation under it.


  ragnar brovik comes out from the house.  he is carrying a
  large green wreath with flowers and silk ribbons.


hilda.

[with an outburst of pleasure.] the wreath! oh, that will be glorious!


solness.

[in surprise.] have you brought the wreath ragnar?


ragnar.

i promised the foreman i would.


solness.

[relieved.] ah, then i suppose you father is better?


ragnar.

no.


solness.

was he not cheered by what i wrote?


ragnar.

it came too late.


solness.

too late!


ragnar.

when she came with it he was unconscious. he had had a stroke.


solness.

why, then, you must go home to him! you must attend to your father!


ragnar.

he does not need me any more.


solness.

but surely you ought to be with him.


ragnar.

she is sitting by his bed.


solness.

[rather uncertainly.] kaia?


ragnar.

[looking darkly at him.] yes--kaia.


solness.

go home, ragnar--both to him and to her. give me the wreath.


ragnar.

[suppresses a mocking smile.] you don't mean that you yourself--?


solness.

i will take it down to them myself [takes the wreath from him.] and now
you go home; we don't require you to-day.


ragnar.

i know you do not require me any more; but to-day i shall remain.


solness.

well, remain then, since you are bent upon it.


hilda.

[at the railing.] mr. solness, i will stand here and look on at you.


solness.

at me!


hilda.

it will be fearfully thrilling.


solness.

[in a low tone.] we will talk about that presently, hilda.

     [he goes down the flight of steps with the wreath, and away
       through the garden.


hilda.

[looks after him, then turns to ragnar.] i think you might at least have
thanked him


ragnar.

thanked him? ought i to have thanked him?


hilda.

yes, of course you ought!


ragnar.

i think it is rather you i ought to thank.


hilda.

how can you say such a thing?


ragnar.

[without answering her.] but i advise you to take care, miss wangel! for
you don't know him rightly yet.


hilda.

[ardently.] oh, no one knows him as i do!


ragnar.

[laughs in exasperation.] thank him, when he has held me down year
after year! when he made father disbelieve in me--made me disbelieve in
myself! and all merely that he might--!


hilda.

[as if divining something.] that he might--? tell me at once!


ragnar.

that he might keep her with him.


hilda.

[with a start towards him.] the girl at the desk.


ragnar.

yes.


hilda.

[threateningly, clenching her hands.] that is not true! you are telling
falsehoods about him!


ragnar.

i would not believe it either until to-day--when she said so herself.


hilda.

[as if beside herself.] what did she say? i will know! at once! at once!


ragnar.

she said that he had taken possession of her mind--her whole
mind--centred all her thoughts upon himself alone. she says that she can
never leave him--that she will remain here, where he is--


hilda.

[with flashing eyes.] she will not be allowed to!


ragnar.

[as if feeling his way.] who will not allow her?


hilda.

[rapidly.] he will not either!


ragnar.

oh no--i understand the whole thing now. after this, she would merely
be--in the way.


hilda.

you understand nothing--since you can talk like that! no, _i_ will tell
you why he kept hold of her.


ragnar.

well then, why?


hilda.

in order to keep hold of you.


ragnar.

has he told you so?


hilda.

no, but it is so. it must be so! [wildly.] i will--i will have it so!


ragnar.

and at the very moment when you came--he let her go.


hilda.

it was you--you that he let go! what do you suppose he cares about
strange women like her?


ragnar.

[reflects.] is it possible that all this time he has been afraid of me?


hilda.

he afraid! i would not be so conceited if i were you.


ragnar.

oh, he must have seen long ago that i had something in me, too.
besides--cowardly--that is just what he is, you see.


hilda.

he! oh yes, i am likely to believe that!


ragnar.

in a certain sense he is cowardly--he, the great master builder. he is
not afraid of robbing others of their happiness--as he has done both
for my father and me. but when it comes to climbing up a paltry bit of
scaffolding--he will do anything rather than that.


hilda.

oh, you should just have seen him high, high up--at the dizzy height
where i once saw him.


ragnar.

did you see that?


hilda.

yes, indeed i did. how free and great he looked as he stood and fastened
the wreath to the church vane!


ragnar.

i know that he ventured that, once in his life--one solitary time. it is
a legend among us younger men. but no power on earth would induce him to
do it again.


hilda.

to-day he will do it again!


ragnar.

[scornfully.] yes, i daresay!


hilda.

we shall see it!


ragnar.

that neither you nor i will see.


hilda.

[with uncontrollable vehemence.] i will se it! i will and i must see it!


ragnar.

but he will not do it. he simply dare not do it. for you see he cannot
get over this infirmity--master builder though he be.


  mrs. solness comes from the house on to the verandah.


mrs. solness.

[looks around.] is he not here? where has he gone to?


ragnar.

mr. solness is down with the men.


hilda.

he took the wreath with him.


mrs. solness.

[terrified.] took the wreath with him! oh god! oh god! brovik--you must
go down to him! get him to come back here!


ragnar.

shall i say you want to speak to him, mrs. solness?


mrs. solness.

oh yes, do!--no, no--don't say that _i_ want anything! you can say that
somebody is here, and that he must come at once.


ragnar.

good. i will do so, mrs. solness.

     [he goes down the flight of steps and away through the garden.


mrs. solness.

oh, miss wangel, you can't think how anxious i feel about him.


hilda.

is there anything in this to be terribly frightened about?


mrs. solness.

oh yes; surely you can understand. just think, if he were really to do
it! if he should take it into his head to climb up the scaffolding!


hilda.

[eagerly.] do you think he will?


mrs. solness.

oh, one can never tell what he might take into his head. i am afraid
there is nothing he mightn't think of doing.


hilda.

aha! perhaps you too think he is--well--?


mrs. solness.

oh, i don't know what to think about him now. the doctor has been
telling me all sorts of things; and putting it all together with several
things i have heard him say--


  dr. herdal looks out, at the door.


dr. herdal.

is he not coming soon?


mrs. solness.

yes, i think so. i have sent for him at any rate.


dr. herdal.

[advancing.] i am afraid you will have to go in, my dear lady--


mrs. solness.

oh no! oh no! i shall stay out here and wait for halvard.


dr. herdal.

but some ladies have just come to call on you--


mrs. solness.

good heavens, that too! and just at this moment!


dr. herdal.

they say they positively must see the ceremony.


mrs. solness.

well, well, i suppose i must go to them after all. it is my duty.


hilda.

can't you ask the ladies to go away?


mrs. solness.

no, that would never do. now that they are here, it is my duty to see
them. but do you stay out here in the meantime--and receive him when he
comes.


dr. herdal.

and try to occupy his attention as long as possible--


mrs. solness.

yes, do, dear miss wangel. keep as firm hold of him as ever you can.


hilda.

would it not be best for you to do that?


mrs. solness.

yes; god knows that is my duty. but when one has duties in so many
directions--


dr. herdal.

[looks towards the garden.] there he is coming.


mrs. solness.

and i have to go in!


dr. herdal.

[to hilda.] don't say anything about my being here.


hilda.

oh no! i daresay i shall find something else to talk to mr. solness
about.


mrs. solness.

and be sure you keep firm hold of him. i believe you can do it best.

     [mrs. solness and dr. herdal go into the house.  hilda remains
       standing on the verandah.  solness comes from the garden, up
       the flight of steps.


solness.

somebody wants me, i hear.


hilda.

yes; it is i, mr. solness.


solness.

oh, is it you, hilda? i was afraid it might be aline or the doctor.


hilda.

you are very easily frightened, it seems!


solness.

do you think so?


hilda.

yes; people say that you are afraid to climb about--on the scaffoldings,
you know.


solness.

well, that is quite a special thing.


hilda.

then it is true that you are afraid to do it?


solness.

yes, i am.


hilda.

afraid of falling down and killing yourself?


solness.

no, not of that.


hilda.

of what, then?


solness.

i am afraid of retribution, hilda.


hilda.

of retribution? [shakes her head.] i don't understand that.


solness.

sit down, and i will tell you something.


hilda.

yes, do! at once!

     [she sits on a stool by the railing, and looks expectantly
       at him.


solness.

[throws his hat on the table.] you know that i began by building
churches.


hilda.

[nods.] i know that well.


solness.

for, you see, i came as a boy from a pious home in the country; and so
it seemed to me that this church-building was the noblest task i could
set myself.


hilda.

yes, yes.


solness.

and i venture to say that i built those poor little churches with such
honest and warm and heartfelt devotion that--that--


hilda.

that--? well?


solness.

well, that i think that he ought to have been pleased with me.


hilda.

he? what he?


solness.

he who was to have the churches, of course! he to whose honour and glory
they were dedicated.


hilda.

oh, indeed! but are you certain, then, that--that he was not--pleased
with you?


solness.

[scornfully.] he pleased with me! how can you talk so, hilda? he who
gave the troll in me leave to lord it just as it pleased. he who bade
them be at hand to serve me, both day and might--all these--all these--


hilda.

devils--


solness.

yes, of both kinds. oh no, he made me feel clearly enough that he was not
pleased with me. [mysteriously.] you see, that was really the reason why
he made the old house burn down.


hilda.

was that why?


solness.

yes, don't you understand? he wanted to give me the chance of becoming
an accomplished master in my own sphere--so that i might build all the
more glorious churches for him. at first i did not understand what he
was driving at; but all of a sudden it flashed upon me.


hilda.

when was that?


solness.

it was when i was building the church-tower up at lysanger.


hilda.

i thought so.


solness.

for you see, hilda--up there, amidst those new surroundings, i used to
go about musing and pondering within myself. then i saw plainly why he
had taken my little children from me. it was that i should have nothing
else to attach myself to. no such thing as love and happiness, you
understand. i was to be only a master builder--nothing else, and all my
life long i was to go on building for him. [laughs.] but i can tell you
nothing came of that!


hilda.

what did you do then?


solness.

first of all, i searched and tried my own heart--


hilda.

and then?


solness.

the i did the impossible--i, no less than he.


hilda.

the impossible?


solness.

i had never before been able to climb up to a great, free height. but
that day i did it.


hilda.

[leaping up.] yes, yes, you did!


solness.

and when i stood there, high over everything, and was hanging the wreath
over the vane, i said to him: hear me now, thou mighty one! from this
day forward i will be a free builder--i too, in my sphere--just as thou
in thine. i will never more build churches for thee--only homes for
human beings.


hilda.

[with great sparkling eyes.] that was the song that i heard through the
air!


solness.

but afterwards his turn came.


hilda.

what do you mean by that?


solness.

[looks despondently at her.] building homes for human beings--is not
worth a rap, hilda.


hilda.

do you say that now?


solness.

yes, for now i see it. men have no use for these homes of theirs--to be
happy in. and i should not have had any use for such a home, if i had
had one. [with a quiet, bitter laugh.] see, that is the upshot of
the whole affair, however far back i look. nothing really built; nor
anything sacrificed for the chance of building. nothing, nothing! the
whole is nothing!


hilda.

then you will never build anything more?


solness.

[with animation.] on the contrary, i am just going to begin!


hilda.

what, then? what will you build? tell me at once!


solness.

i believe there is only one possible dwelling-place for human
happiness--and that is what i am going to build now.


hilda.

[looks fixedly at him.] mr. solness--you mean our castles in the air.


solness.

the castles in the air--yes.


hilda.

i am afraid you would turn dizzy before we got half-way up.


solness.

not if i can mount hand in hand with you, hilda.


hilda.

[with an expression of suppressed resentment.] only with me? will there
be no others of the party?


solness.

who else should there be?


hilda.

oh--that girl--that kaia at the desk. poor thing--don't you want to take
her with you too?


solness.

oho! was it about her that aline was talking to you?


hilda.

is it so--or is it not?


solness.

[vehemently.] i will not answer such a question. you must believe in me,
wholly and entirely!


hilda.

all these ten years i have believed in you so utterly--so utterly.


solness.

you must go on believing in me!


hilda.

then let me see you stand free and high up!


solness.

[sadly.] oh hilda--it is not every day that i can do that.


hilda.

[passionately.] i will have you do it! i will have it! [imploringly.]
just once more, mr. solness! do the impossible once again!


solness.

[stands and looks deep into her eyes.] if i try it, hilda, i will stand
up there and talk to him as i did that time before.


hilda.

[in rising excitement.] what will you say to him?


solness.

i will say to him: hear me, mighty lord--thou may'st judge me as seems
best to thee. but hereafter i will build nothing but the loveliest thing
in the world--


hilda.

[carried away.] yes--yes--yes!


solness. --build it together with a princess, whom i love--


hilda.

yes, tell him that! tell him that!


solness.

yes. and then i will say to him: now i shall go down and throw my arms
round her and kiss her--


hilda. --many times! say that!


solness. --many, many times, i will say it!


hilda.

and then--?


solness.

then i will wave my hat--and come down to the earth--and do as i said to
him.


hilda.

[with outstretched arms.] now i see you again as i did when there was
song in the air!


solness.

[looks at here with his head bowed.] how have you become what you are,
hilda?


hilda.

how have you made me what i am?


solness.

[shortly and firmly.] the princess shall have her castle.


hilda.

[jubilant, clapping her hands.] oh, mr. solness--! my lovely, lovely
castle. our castle in the air!


solness.

on a firm foundation.

     [in the street a crowd of people has assembled, vaguely seen
       through the trees.  music of wind-instruments is heard far
       away behind the new house.


  mrs. solness, with a fur collar round her neck, doctor herdal
  with her white shawl on his arm, and some ladies, come out
  on the verandah.  ragnar brovik comes at the same time up
  from the garden.


mrs. solness.

[to ragnar.] are we to have music, too?


ragnar.

yes. it's the band of the mason's union. [to solness.] the foreman asked
me to tell you that he is ready now to go up with the wreath.


solness.

[takes his hat.] good. i will go down to him myself.


mrs. solness.

[anxiously.] what have you to do down there, halvard?


solness.

[curtly.] i must be down below with the men.


mrs. solness.

yes, down below--only down below.


solness.

that is where i always stand--on everyday occasions.

     [he goes down the flight of steps and away through the garden.


mrs. solness.

[calls after him over the railing.] but do beg the man to be careful
when he goes up! promise me that, halvard!


dr. herdal.

[to mrs. solness.] don't you see that i was right? he has given up all
thought of that folly.


mrs. solness.

oh, what a relief! twice workmen have fallen, and each time they were
killed on the spot. [turns to hilda.] thank you, miss wangel, for having
kept such a firm hold upon him. i should never have been able to manage
him.


dr. herdal.

[playfully.] yes, yes, miss wangel, you know how to keep firm hold on a
man, when you give your mind to it.

     [mrs. solness and dr. herdal go up to the ladies, who are
       standing nearer to the steps and looking over the garden.
       hilda remains standing beside the railing in the foreground.
       ragnar goes up to her.


ragnar.

[with suppressed laughter, half whispering.] miss wangel--do you see all
those young fellows down in the street?


hilda.

yes.


ragnar.

they are my fellow students, come to look at the master.


hilda.

what do they want to look at him for?


ragnar.

they want to see how he daren't climb to the top of his own house.


hilda.

oh, that is what those boys want, is it?


ragnar.

[spitefully and scornfully.] he has kept us down so long--now we are
going to see him keep quietly down below himself.


hilda.

you will not see that--not this time.


ragnar.

[smiles.] indeed! then where shall we see him?


hilda.

high--high up by the vane! that is where you will see him!


ragnar.

[laughs.] him! oh yes, i daresay!


hilda.

his will is to reach the top--so at the top you shall see him.


ragnar.

his will, yes; that i can easily believe. but he simply cannot do it.
his head would swim round, long, long before he got half-way. he would
have to crawl down again on his hands and knees.


dr. herdal.

[points across.] look! there goes the foreman up the ladders.


mrs. solness.

and of course he has the wreath to carry too. oh, i do hope he will be
careful!


ragnar.

[stares incredulously and shouts.] why, but it's--


hilda.

[breaking out in jubilation.] it is the master builder himself?


mrs. solness.

[screams with terror.] yes, it is halvard! oh my great god--! halvard!
halvard!


dr. herdal.

hush! don't shout to him!


mrs. solness.

[half beside herself.] i must go to him! i must get him to come down
again!


dr. herdal.

[holds her.] don't move, any of you! not a sound!


hilda.

[immovable, follows solness with her eyes.] he climbs and climbs. higher
and higher! higher and higher! look! just look!


ragnar.

[breathless.] he must turn now. he can't possibly help it.


hilda.

he climbs and climbs. he will soon be at the top now.


mrs. solness.

oh, i shall die of terror. i cannot bear to see it.


dr. herdal.

then don't look up at him.


hilda.

there he is standing on the topmost planks! right at the top!


dr. herdal.

nobody must move! do you dear?


hilda.

[exulting, with quiet intensity.] at last! at last! now i see him great
and free again!


ragnar.

[almost voiceless.] but this is im--


hilda.

so i have seen him all through these ten years. how secure he stands!
frightfully thrilling all the same. look at him! now he is hanging the
wreath round the vane!


ragnar.

i feel as if i were looking at something utterly impossible.


hilda.

yes, it is the impossible that he is doing now! [with the indefinable
expression in her eyes.] can you see any one else up there with him?


ragnar.

there is no one else.


hilda.

yes, there is one he is striving with.


ragnar.

you are mistaken.


hilda.

then do you hear no song in the air, either?


ragnar.

it must be the wind in the tree-tops.


hilda.

_i_ hear a song--a mighty song! [shouts in wild jubilation and glee.]
look, look! now he is waving his hat! he is waving it to us down here!
oh, wave, wave back to him! for now it is finished! [snatches the white
shawl from the doctor, waves it, and shouts up to solness.] hurrah for
master builder solness!


dr. herdal.

stop! stop! for god's sake--!

     [the ladies on the verandah wave their pocket-handkerchiefs, and
       the shouts of "hurrah" are taken up in the street.  then they
       are suddenly silenced, and the crowd bursts out into a shriek
       of horror.  a human body, with planks and fragments of wood,
       is vaguely perceived crashing down behind the trees.


mrs. solness and the ladies.

[at the same time.] he is falling! he is falling!

     [mrs. solness totters, falls backwards, swooning, and is caught,
       amid cries and confusion, by the ladies.  the crowd in the
       street breaks down the fence and storms into the garden.  at
       the same time dr. herdal, too, rushes down thither.  a short
       pause.


hilda.

[stares fixedly upwards and says, as if petrified.] my master builder.


ragnar.

[supports himself, trembling, against the railing.] he must be dashed to
pieces--killed on the spot.


one of the ladies.

[whilst mrs. solness is carried into the house.] run down for the
doctor--


ragnar.

i can't stir a root--


another lady.

then call to some one!


ragnar.

[tries to call out.] how is it? is he alive?


a voice.

[below, in the garden.] mr. solness is dead!


other voices.

[nearer.] the head is all crushed.--he fell right into the quarry.


hilda.

[turns to ragnar, and says quietly.] i can't see him up there now.


ragnar.

this is terrible. so, after all, he could not do it.


hilda.

[as if in quiet spell-bound triumph.] but he mounted right to the top.
and i heard harps in the air. [waves her shawl in the air, and shrieks
with wild intensity.] my--my master builder!


<|EndOfText|>

dramatis personae

  john rosmer, of rosmersholm, an ex-clergyman.
  rebecca west, one of his household, originally engaged as
      companion to the late mrs. rosmer.
  kroll, headmaster of the local grammar school, rosmer's
      brother-in-law.
  ulrik brendel.
  peter mortensgaard.
  mrs. helseth, rosmer's housekeeper.

(the action takes place at rosmersholm, an old manor-house in the
neighbourhood of a small town on a fjord in western norway.)




act 1


(scene--the sitting-room at rosmersholm; a spacious room, comfortably
furnished in old-fashioned style. in the foreground, against the
right-hand wall, is a stove decorated with sprigs of fresh birch and
wild flowers. farther back, a door. in the back wall folding doors
leading into the entrance hall. in the left-hand wall a window, in
front of which is a stand filled with flowers and plants. near the
stove stand a table, a couch and an easy-chair. the walls are hung
round with portraits, dating from various periods, of clergymen,
military officers and other officials in uniform. the window is open,
and so are the doors into the lobby and the outer door. through the
latter is seen an avenue of old trees leading to a courtyard. it is a
summer evening, after sunset. rebecca west is sitting by the window
crocheting a large white woollen shawl, which is nearly completed. from
time to time she peeps out of window through the flowers. mrs. helseth
comes in from the right.)

mrs. helseth. hadn't i better begin and lay the table for supper, miss?

rebecca. yes, do. mr. rosmer ought to be in directly.

mrs. helseth. isn't there a draught where you are sitting, miss?

rebecca. there is a little. will you shut up, please? (mrs. helseth
goes to the hall door and shuts it. then she goes to the window, to
shut it, and looks out.)

mrs. helseth. isn't that mr. rosmer coming there?

rebecca. where? (gets up.) yes, it is he. (stands behind the
window-curtain.) stand on one side. don't let him catch sight of us.

mrs. helseth (stepping back). look, miss--he is beginning to use the
mill path again.

rebecca. he came by the mill path the day before yesterday too. (peeps
out between the curtain and the window-frame). now we shall see
whether--

mrs. helseth. is he going over the wooden bridge?

rebecca. that is just what i want to see. (after a moment.) no. he has
turned aside. he is coming the other way round to-day too. (comes away
from the window.) it is a long way round.

mrs. helseth. yes, of course. one can well understand his shrinking
from going over that bridge. the spot where such a thing has happened
is--

rebecca (folding up her work). they cling to their dead a long time at
rosmersholm.

mrs. helseth. if you ask me, miss, i should say it is the dead that
cling to rosmersholm a long time.

rebecca (looking at her). the dead?

mrs. helseth. yes, one might almost say that they don't seem to be able
to tear themselves away from those they have left behind.

rebecca. what puts that idea into your head?

mrs. helseth. well, otherwise i know the white horses would not be seen
here.

rebecca. tell me, mrs. helseth--what is this superstition about the
white horses?

mrs. helseth. oh, it is not worth talking about. i am sure you don't
believe in such things, either.

rebecca. do you believe in them?

mrs. helseth (goes to the window and shuts it). oh, i am not going to
give you a chance of laughing at me, miss. (looks out.) see--is that
not mr. rosmer out on the mill path again?

rebecca (looking out). that man out there? (goes to the window.) why,
that is mr. kroll, of course!

mrs. helseth. so it is, to be sure.

rebecca. that is delightful, because he is certain to be coming here.

mrs. helseth. he actually comes straight over the wooden bridge, he
does for all that she was his own sister. well, i will go in and get
the supper laid, miss. (goes out to the right. rebecca stands still for
a moment, then waves her hand out of the window, nodding and smiling.
darkness is beginning to fall.)

rebecca (going to the door on the right and calling through it). mrs.
helseth, i am sure you won't mind preparing something extra nice for
supper? you know what dishes mr. kroll is especially fond of.

mrs. helseth. certainly, miss. i will.

rebecca (opening the door into the lobby). at last, mr. kroll! i am so
glad to see you!

kroll (coming into the lobby and putting down his stick). thank you.
are you sure i am not disturbing you?

rebecca. you? how can you say such a thing?

kroll (coming into the room). you are always so kind. (looks round the
room.) is john up in his room?

rebecca. no, he has gone out for a walk. he is later than usual of
coming in, but he is sure to be back directly. (points to the sofa.) do
sit down and wait for him.

kroll (putting down his hat). thank you. (sits down and looks about
him.) how charmingly pretty you have made the old room look! flowers
everywhere!

rebecca. mr. rosmer is so fond of having fresh flowers about him.

kroll. and so are you, i should say.

rebecca. yes, i am. i think their scent has such a delicious effect on
one--and till lately we had to deny ourselves that pleasure, you know.

kroll (nodding slowly). poor beata could not stand the scent of them.

rebecca. nor their colours either. they made her feel dazed.

kroll. yes, i remember. (continues in a more cheerful tone of voice).
well, and how are things going here?

rebecca. oh, everything goes on in the same quiet, placid way. one day
is exactly like another. and how are things with you? is your wife--?

kroll. oh, my dear miss west, don't let us talk about my affairs. in a
family there is always something or other going awry--especially in
such times as we live in now.

rebecca (after a short pause, sitting down in an easy-chair near the
sofa). why have you never once been near us during the whole of your
holidays?

kroll. oh, it doesn't do to be importunate, you know.

rebecca. if you only knew how we have missed you.

kroll. and, besides, i have been away, you know.

rebecca. yes, for a fortnight or so. i suppose you have been going the
round of the public meetings?

kroll (nods). yes, what do you say to that? would you ever have thought
i would become a political agitator in my old age--eh?

rebecca (smilingly). you have always been a little bit of an agitator,
mr. kroll.

kroll. oh, yes; just for my own amusement. but for the future it is
going to be in real earnest. do you ever read the radical newspapers?

rebecca. yes, i won't deny that!

kroll. my dear miss west, there is no objection to that--not as far as
you are concerned.

rebecca. no, that is just what i think. i must follow the course of
events--keep up with what is happening.

kroll. well, under any circumstances, i should never expect you, as a
woman, to side actively with either party in the civic dispute--indeed
one might more properly call it the civil war--that is raging here. i
dare say you have read, then, the abuse these "nature's gentlemen" are
pleased to shower upon me, and the scandalous coarseness they consider
they are entitled to make use of?

rebecca. yes, but i think you have held your own pretty forcibly.

kroll. that i have--though i say it. i have tasted blood now, and i
will make them realise that i am not the sort of man to take it lying
down--. (checks himself.) no, no, do not let us get upon that sad and
distressing topic this evening.

rebecca. no, my dear mr. kroll, certainly not.

kroll. tell me, instead, how you find you get on at rosmersholm, now
that you are alone here--i mean, since our poor beata--

rebecca. oh, thanks--i get on very well here. her death has made a
great gap in the house in many ways, of course--and one misses her and
grieves for her, naturally. but in other respects--

kroll. do you think you will remain here?--permanently, i mean?

rebecca. dear mr. kroll, i really never think about it at all. the fact
is that i have become so thoroughly domesticated here that i almost
feel as if i belonged to the place too.

kroll. you? i should think you did!

rebecca. and as long as mr. rosmer finds i can be any comfort or any
use to him, i will gladly remain here, undoubtedly.

kroll (looking at her, with some emotion). you know, there is something
splendid about a woman's sacrificing the whole of her youth for others.

rebecca. what else have i had to live for?

kroll. at first when you came here there was your perpetual worry with
that unreasonable cripple of a foster-father of yours--

rebecca. you mustn't think that dr. west was as unreasonable as that
when we lived in finmark. it was the trying journeys by sea that broke
him up. but it is quite true that after we had moved here there were
one or two hard years before his sufferings were over.

kroll. were not the years that followed even harder for you?

rebecca. no; how can you say such a thing! i, who was so genuinely fond
of beata--! and she, poor soul was so sadly in need of care and
sympathetic companionship.

kroll. you deserve to be thanked and rewarded for the forbearance with
which you speak of her.

rebecca (moving a little nearer to him). dear mr. kroll, you say that
so kindly and so sincerely that i feel sure you really bear me no
ill-will.

kroll. ill-will? what do you mean?

rebecca. well, it would not be so very surprising if it were rather
painful for you to see me, a stranger, doing just as i like here at
rosmersholm.

kroll. how in the world could you think--!

rebecca. then it is not so? (holds out her hand to, him.) thank you,
mr. kroll; thank you for that.

kroll. but what on earth could make you take such an idea into your
head?

rebecca. i began to be afraid it might be so, as you have so seldom
been out here to see us lately.

kroll. i can assure you, you have been on the wrong scent entirely,
miss west. and, in any case, the situation of affairs is unchanged in
any essential point; because during the last sad years of poor beata's
life it was you and you alone, even then, that looked after everything
here.

rebecca. but it was more like a kind of regency in the wife's name.

kroll. whatever it was, i--. i will tell you what, miss west; as far as
i am concerned i should have nothing whatever to say against it if you.
but it doesn't do to say such things.

rebecca. what things?

kroll. well, if it so happened that you were to step into the empty
place--

rebecca. i have the place i want, already, mr. kroll.

kroll. yes, as far as material benefits go; but not--

rebecca (interrupting him, in a serious voice). for shame, mr. kroll!
how can you sit there and jest about such things!

kroll. oh, well, i dare say our good john rosmer thinks he has had more
than enough of married life. but, all the same--

rebecca. really, you almost make me feel inclined to laugh at you.

kroll. all the same--tell me, miss west, if i may be allowed the
question, how old are you?

rebecca. i am ashamed to say i was twenty-nine on my last birthday, mr.
kroll. i am nearly thirty.

kroll. quite so. and rosmer--how old is he? let me see. he is five
years younger than me, so he must be just about forty-three. it seems
to me it would be very suitable.

rebecca. no doubt, no doubt. it would be remarkably suitable--will you
stop and have supper with us?

kroll. thank you. i had meant to pay you a good long visit, because
there is a matter i want to talk over with our excellent friend--well,
then, miss west, to prevent your taking foolish ideas into your head
again, i will come out here again from time to time, as in the old days.

rebecca. yes, please do. (holds out her hand to, him.) thank you, thank
you! you are really uncommonly good-natured.

kroll (with a little grumble). am i? i can tell you that is more than
they say at home. (rosmer comes in by the door on the right.)

rebecca. mr. rosmer, do you see who is sitting here?

rosmer. mrs. helseth told me. (kroll gets up.) i am so glad to see you
here again, my dear fellow. (puts his hands on kroll's shoulders and
looks him in the face.) dear old friend! i knew that one day we should
be on our old footing again.

kroll. my dear fellow, have you that insane idea in your head too, that
any thing could come between us?

rebecca (to rosmer). isn't it delightful to think it was all our
imagination!

rosmer. is that really true, kroll? but why have you kept so
obstinately away from us?

kroll (seriously, and in, a subdued voice). because i did not want to
come here like a living reminder of the unhappy time that is past--and
of her who met her death in the mill-race.

rosmer. it was a very kind thought on your part. you are always so
considerate. but it was altogether unnecessary to keep away from us on
that account. come along, let us sit down on the sofa. (they sit down.)
i can assure you it is not in the least painful for me to think about
beata. we talk about her every day. she seems to us to have a part in
the house still.

kroll. does she really?

rebecca (lighting the lamp). yes, it is really quite true.

rosmer. she really does. we both think so affectionately of her. and
both rebecca--both miss west and i know in our hearts that we did all
that lay in our power for the poor afflicted creature. we have nothing
to reproach ourselves with. that is why i feel there is something sweet
and peaceful in the way we can think of beata now.

kroll. you dear good people! in future i am coming out to see you every
day.

rebecca (sitting down in an arm-chair). yes, let us see that you keep
your word.

rosmer (with a slight hesitation). i assure you, my dear fellow, my
dearest wish would be that our intimacy should never suffer in any way.
you know, you have seemed to be my natural adviser as long as we have
known one another, even from my student days.

kroll. i know, and i am very proud of the privilege. is there by any
chance anything in particular just now--?

rosmer. there are a great many things that i want very much to talk
over with you frankly--things that lie very near my heart.

rebecca. i feel that is so, too, mr. rosmer. it seems to me it would be
such a good thing if you two old friends--

kroll. well, i can assure you i have even more to talk over with
you--because i have become an active politician, as i dare say you know.

rosmer. yes, i know you have. how did that come about?

kroll. i had to, you see, whether i liked it or not. it became
impossible for me to remain an idle spectator any longer. now that the
radicals have become so distressingly powerful, it was high time. and
that is also why i have induced our little circle of friends in the
town to bind themselves more definitely together. it was high time, i
can tell you!

rebecca (with a slight smile). as a matter of fact, isn't it really
rather late now?

kroll. there is no denying it would have been more fortunate if we had
succeeded in checking the stream at an earlier point. but who could
really foresee what was coming? i am sure i could not. (gets up and
walks up and down.) anyway, my eyes are completely opened now; for the
spirit of revolt has spread even into my school.

rosmer. into the school? surely not into your school?

kroll. indeed it has. into my own school. what do you think of this? i
have got wind of the fact that the boys in the top class--or rather, a
part of the boys in it--have formed themselves into a secret society
and have been taking in mortensgaard's paper!

rebecca. ah, the "searchlight".

kroll. yes, don't you think that is a nice sort of intellectual pabulum
for future public servants? but the saddest part of it is that it is
all the most promising boys in the class that have conspired together
and hatched this plot against me. it is only the duffers and dunces
that have held aloof from it.

rebecca. do you take it so much to heart, mr. kroll?

kroll. do i take it to heart, to find myself so hampered and thwarted
in my life's work? (speaking more gently.) i might find it in my heart
to say that i could even take that for what it is worth; but i have not
told you the worst of it yet. (looks round the room.) i suppose nobody
is likely to be listening at the doors?

rebecca. oh, certainly not.

kroll. then let me tell you that the revolt and dissension has spread
into my own home--into my own peaceful home--and has disturbed the
peace of my family life.

rosmer (getting up). do you mean it? in your own home?

rebecca (going up to kroll). dear mr. kroll, what has happened?

kroll. would you believe it that my own children--. to make a long
story short, my boy laurits is the moving spirit of the conspiracy at
the school. and hilda has embroidered a red portfolio to keep the
numbers of the "searchlight" in.

rosmer. i should never have dreamed of such a thing; in your family--in
your own house!

kroll. no, who would ever have dreamed of such a thing? in my house,
where obedience and order have always ruled--where hitherto there has
never been anything but one unanimous will--

rebecca. how does your wife take it?

kroll. ah, that is the most incredible part of the whole thing. she,
who all her days--in great things and small--has concurred in my
opinions and approved of all my views, has actually not refrained from
throwing her weight on the children's side on many points. and now she
considers i am to blame for what has happened. she says i try to coerce
the young people too much. just as if it were not necessary to--. well,
those are the sort of dissensions i have going on at home. but
naturally i talk as little about it as possible; it is better to be
silent about such things. (walks across the floor.) oh, yes.--oh, yes.
(stands by the window, with his hands behind his back, and looks out.)

rebecca (goes up to rosmer, and speaks in low, hurried tones, unheard
by kroll). do it!

rosmer (in the same tone). not to-night.

rebecca (as before). yes, this night of all others. (goes away from him
and adjusts the lamp.)

kroll (coming back). yes, my dear john, so now you know the sort of
spirit of the age that has cast its shadow both over my home life and
my official work. ought i not to oppose this appalling, destructive,
disorganising tendency with all the weapons i can lay my hands upon? of
course it is certainly my duty--and that both with my pen and my tongue.

rosmer. but have you any hope that you can produce any effect in that
way?

kroll. at all events i mean to take my share in the fight as a citizen.
and i consider that it is the duty of every patriotic man, every man
who is concerned about what is right, to do the same. and, i may as
well tell you, that is really the reason why i have come here to see
you to-night.

rosmer. my dear fellow, what do you mean? what can i--?

kroll. you are going to help your old friends, and do as we are
doing--take your share in it to the best of your ability.

rebecca. but, mr. kroll, you know how little taste mr. rosmer has for
that sort of thing.

kroll. then he has got to overcome that distaste now. you do not keep
abreast of the times, john. you sit here and bury yourself in your
historical researches. goodness knows, i have the greatest respect for
family pedigrees and all that they imply. but this is not the time for
such occupations, unhappily. you have no conception of the state of
affairs that is going on all over the country. every single idea is
turned upside down, or very nearly so. it will be a hard fight to get
all the errors straightened out again.

rosmer. i can quite believe it. but that sort of a fight is not in my
line at all.

rebecca. besides, i rather fancy that mr. rosmer has come to look at
the affairs of life with wider opened eyes than before.

kroll (with a start). wider opened eyes?

rebecca. yes, or with an opener mind--with less prejudice.

kroll. what do you mean by that? john--surely you could never be so
weak as to allow yourself to be deluded by the accidental circumstance
that the demagogues have scored a temporary success!

rosmer. my dear fellow, you know very well that i am no judge of
politics; but it certainly seems to me that of late years individual
thought has become somewhat more independent.

kroll. quite so--but do you consider that as a matter of course to be a
good thing? in any case you are vastly mistaken, my friend. just
inquire a little into the opinions that are current amongst the
radicals, both out here in the country and in town. you will find them
to be nothing else than the words of wisdom that appear in the
"searchlight".

rebecca. yes, mortensgaard has a great deal of influence over the
people about here.

kroll. yes, just think of it--a man with as dirty a record as his! a
fellow that was turned out of his place as a schoolmaster because of
his immoral conduct! this is the sort of man that poses as a leader of
the people! and successfully, too!--actually successfully! i hear that
he means to enlarge his paper now. i know, on reliable authority, that
he is looking for a competent assistant.

rebecca. it seems to me surprising that you and your friends do not
start an opposition paper.

kroll. that is exactly what we intend to do. this very day we have
bought the "county news." there was no difficulty about the financial
side of the matter; but-- (turns towards rosmer) now we have come to
the real purport of my visit. it is the management of it--the editorial
management--that is the difficulty, you see. look here, rosmer--don't
you feel called upon to undertake it, for the sake of the good cause?

rosmer (in a tone of consternation). i!

rebecca. how can you think of such a thing!

kroll. i can quite understand your having a horror of public meetings
and being unwilling to expose yourself to the mercies of the rabble
that frequents them. but an editor's work, which is carried on in much
greater privacy, or rather--

rosmer. no, no, my dear fellow, you must not ask that of me.

kroll. it would give me the greatest pleasure to have a try at work of
that sort myself--only it would be quite out of the question for me; i
am already saddled with such an endless number of duties. you, on the
other hand, who are no longer hampered by any official duties, might--.
of course the rest of us would give you all the help in our power.

rosmer. i cannot do it, kroll. i am not fitted for it.

kroll. not fitted for it? that was just what you said when your father
got you your living.

rosmer. i was quite right; and that was why i resigned it, too.

kroll. well, if you only make as good an editor as you did a parson, we
shall be quite satisfied.

rosmer. my dear kroll--once for all--i cannot do it.

kroll. well, then, i suppose you will give us the use of your name, at
all events?

rosmer. my name?

kroll. yes, the mere fact of john rosmer's name being connected with it
will be a great advantage to the paper. we others are looked upon as
pronounced partisans. i myself even have the reputation of being a
wicked fanatic, i am told. therefore we cannot count upon our own names
to give us any particular help in making the paper known to the
misguided masses. but you, on the contrary, have always held aloof from
this kind of fighting. your gentle and upright disposition, your
polished mind, your unimpeachable honour, are known to and appreciated
by every one about here. and then there is the deference and respect
that your former position as a clergyman ensures for you--and, besides
that, there is the veneration in which your family, name is held!

rosmer. oh, my family name.

kroll (pointing to the portraits). rosmers of rosmersholm--clergymen,
soldiers, men who have filled high places in the state--men of
scrupulous honour, every one of them--a family that has been rooted
here, the most influential in the place, for nearly two centuries.
(lays his hand on rosmer's shoulder.) john, you owe it to yourself and
to the traditions of your race to join us in defence of all that has
hitherto been held sacred in our community. (turning to rebecca.) what
do you say, miss west?

rebecca (with a quiet little laugh). my dear mr. kroll--it all sounds
so absurdly ludicrous to me.

kroll. what! ludicrous?

rebecca. yes, because it is time you were told plainly--

rosmer (hurriedly). no, no--don't! not now!

kroll (looking from one to the other). but, my dear friends, what on
earth--? (breaks off, as mrs. helseth comes in, by the door on the
right.) ahem!

mrs. helseth. there is a man at the kitchen door, sir. he says he wants
to see you.

rosmer (in a relieved voice). is there? well, ask him to come in.

mrs. helseth. shall i show him in here, sir?

rosmer. certainly.

mrs. helseth. but he doesn't look the sort of man one ought to allow in
here.

rebecca. what does he look like, mrs. helseth?

mrs. helseth. oh, he is not much to look at, miss.

rosmer. did he not give you his name?

mrs. helseth. yes, i think he said it was hekman, or something like
that.

rosmer. i do not know any one of that name.

mrs. helseth. and he said his christian name was ulrik.

rosmer (with a start of surprise). ulrik hetman! was that it?

mrs. helseth. yes, sir, it was hetman.

kroll. i am certain i have heard that name before.

rebecca. surely it was the name that strange creature used to write
under--

rosmer (to kroll). it is ulrik brendel's pseudonym, you know.

kroll. that scamp ulrik brendel. you are quite right.

rebecca. so he is alive still.

rosmer. i thought he was travelling with a theatrical company.

kroll. the last i heard of him was that he was in the workhouse.

rosmer. ask him to come in, mrs. helseth.

mrs. helseth. yes, sir. (goes out.)

kroll. do you really mean to allow this fellow into your house?

rosmer. oh, well, you know he was my tutor once.

kroll. i know that what he did was to stuff your head with
revolutionary ideas, and that in consequence your father turned him out
of the house with a horsewhip.

rosmer (a little bitterly). yes, my father was always the commanding
officer--even at home.

kroll. be grateful to his memory for that, my dear john. ah!

(mrs. helseth shows ulrik brendel in at the door, then goes out and
shuts the door after her. brendel is a good-looking man with grey hair
and beard; somewhat emaciated, but active and alert; he is dressed like
a common tramp, in a threadbare frock coat, shoes with holes in them,
and no visible linen at his neck or wrists. he wears a pair of old
black gloves, carries a dirty soft hat under his arm, and has a
walking-stick in his hand. he looks puzzled at first, then goes quickly
up to kroll and holds out his hand to him.)

brendel. good-evening, john!

kroll. excuse me

brendel. did you ever expect to see me again? and inside these hated
walls, too?

kroll. excuse me. (points to rosmer.) over there.

brendel (turning round). quite right. there he is. john--my boy--my
favourite pupil!

rosmer (shaking hands with him). my old tutor!

brendel. in spite of certain recollections, i could not pass by
rosmersholm without paying you a flying visit.

rosmer. you are very welcome here now. be sure of that.

brendel. and this charming lady--? (bows to rebecca.) your wife, of
course.

rosmer. miss west.

brendel. a near relation, i presume. and our stranger friend here? a
colleague, i can see.

rosmer. mr. kroll, master of the grammar school here.

brendel. kroll? kroll? wait a moment. did you take the philology course
in your student days?

kroll. certainly i did.

brendel. by jove, i used to know you, then

kroll. excuse me--

brendel. were you not--

kroll. excuse me--

brendel. --one of those champions of all the virtues that got me turned
out of the debating society?

kroll. very possibly. but i disclaim any other acquaintance with you.

brendel. all right, all right! nach belieben, mr. kroll. i dare say i
shall get over it. ulrik brendel will still be himself in spite of it.

rebecca. are you on your way to the town, mr. brendel?

brendel. you have hit the nail on the head, ma'am. at certain intervals
i am obliged to do something for my living. i do not do it
willingly--but, enfin--when needs must--

rosmer. my dear mr. brendel, will you not let me be of assistance to
you? in some way or another, i mean--

brendel. ah, what a proposal to come from you! could you wish to soil
the tie that binds us together? never, john--never!

rosmer. but what do you propose to do in the town, then? i assure you,
you won't find it so easy--

brendel. leave that to me, my boy. the die is cast. the unworthy
individual who stands before you is started on an extensive
campaign--more extensive than all his former excursions put together.
(to kroll.) may i venture to ask you, professor--unter uns--are there
in your esteemed town any fairly decent, respectable and spacious
assembly-rooms?

kroll. the most spacious is the hall belonging to the working men's
association.

brendel. may i ask, sir, if you have any special influence with that no
doubt most useful association?

kroll. i have nothing whatever to do with it.

rebecca (to brendel). you ought to apply to peter mortensgaard.

brendel. pardon, madame--what sort of an idiot is he?

rosmer. why do you make up your mind he is an idiot?

brendel. do you suppose i can't tell, from the sound of the name, that
it belongs to a plebeian?

kroll. i did not expect that answer.

brendel. but i will conquer my prejudices. there is nothing else for
it. when a man stands at a turning-point in his life--as i do--. that
is settled. i shall, put myself into communication with this
person--commence direct negotiations.

rosmer. are you in earnest when you say you are standing at a
turning-point in your life?

brendel. does my own boy not know that wherever ulrik brendel stands he
is always in earnest about it? look here, i mean to become a new man
now--to emerge from the cloak of reserve in which i have hitherto
shrouded myself.

rosmer. in what way?

brendel. i mean to take an active part in life--to step forward--to
look higher. the atmosphere we breathe is heavy with storms. i want now
to offer my mite upon the altar of emancipation.

kroll. you too?

brendel (to them all). has your public here any intimate acquaintance
with my scattered writings?

kroll. no, i must candidly confess that--

rebecca. i have read several of them. my foster-father had them.

brendel. my dear lady, then you have wasted your time. they are simply
trash, allow me to tell you.

rebecca. really?

brendel. those you have read, yes. my really important works no man or
woman knows anything about. no one--except myself.

rebecca. how is that?

brendel. because they are not yet written.

rosmer. but, my dear mr. brendel--

brendel. you know, my dear john, that i am a bit of a sybarite--a
gourmet. i have always been so. i have a taste for solitary enjoyment,
because in that way my enjoyment is twice--ten times--as keen. it is,
like this. when i have been wrapped in a haze of golden dreams that
have descended on me--when new, intoxicating, momentous thoughts have
had their birth in my mind, and i have been fanned by the beat of their
wings as they bore me aloft--at such moments i have transformed them
into poetry, into visions, into pictures. in general outlines, that is
to say.

rosmer. quite so.

brendel. you cannot imagine the luxury of enjoyment i have experienced!
the mysterious rapture of creation!--in, general outlines, as i said.
applause, gratitude, eulogies, crowns of laurel!--all these i have
culled with full hands trembling with joy. in my secret ecstasies i
have steeped myself in a happiness so, intoxicating--

kroll. ahem!

rosmer. but you have never written anything of it down?

brendel. not a word. the thought of the dull clerk's work that it would
mean has always moved me to a nauseating sense of disgust. besides, why
should i profane my own ideals when i could enjoy them, in all their
purity, by myself? but now they shall be sacrificed. honestly, i feel
as a mother must do when she entrusts her young daughter to the arms of
a husband. but i am going to, sacrifice them nevertheless--sacrifice
them on the altar of emancipation. a series of carefully thought-out
lectures, to be delivered all over the country!

rebecca (impetuously). that is splendid of you, mr. brendel! you are
giving up the most precious thing you possess.

rosmer. the only thing.

rebecca (looking meaningly at rosmer). i wonder how many there are who
would do as much--who dare do it?

rosmer (returning her look). who knows?

brendel. my audience is moved. that refreshes my heart and strengthens
my will--and now i shall proceed upon my task forthwith. there is one
other point, though. (to kroll.) can you inform me, sir, whether there
is an abstainers' society in the town? a total abstainers' society? i
feel sure there must be.

kroll. there is one, at your service. i am the president.

brendel. i could tell that as soon as i saw you! well, it is not at all
impossible that i may come to you and become a member for a week.

kroll. excuse me--we do not accept weekly members.

brendel. a la bonne heure, my good sir. ulrik brendel has never been in
the habit of forcing himself upon societies of that kind. (turns to go)
but i must not prolong my stay in this house, rich as it is in
memories. i must go into the town and find some suitable lodging. i
shall find a decent hotel of some kind there, i hope?

rebecca. will you not have something hot to drink before you go?

brendel. of what nature, dear lady?

rebecca. a cup of tea, or--

brendel. a thousand thanks to the most generous of hostesses!--but i do
not like trespassing on private hospitality. (waves his hand.) good-bye
to you all! (goes to the door, but turns back.) oh, by the
way--john--mr. rosmer--will you do your former tutor a service for old
friendship's sake?

rosmer. with the greatest of pleasure.

brendel. good. well, then, lend me--just for a day or two--a starched
shirt.

rosmer. nothing more than that!

brendel. because, you see, i am travelling on foot--on this occasion.
my trunk is being sent after me.

rosmer. quite so. but, in that case, isn't there anything else?

brendel. well, i will tell you what--perhaps you have an old, worn-out
summer coat that you could spare?

rosmer. certainly i have.

brendel. and if there happened to be a pair of presentable shoes that
would go with the coat.

rosmer. i am sure we can manage that, too. as soon as you let us know
your address, we will send the things to you.

brendel. please don't think of it! no one must be put to any
inconvenience on my account! i will take the trifles with me.

rosmer. very well. will you come upstairs with me, then?

rebecca. let me go. mrs. helseth and i will see about it.

brendel. i could never think of allowing this charming lady--

rebecca. nonsense! come along, mr. brendel. (she goes out by the door
on the right.)

rosmer (holding brendel back). tell me--is there no other way i can be
of service to you?

brendel. i am sure i do not know of any. yes, perdition seize it!--now
that i come to think of it--john, do you happen to have seven or eight
shillings on you?

rosmer. i will see. (opens his purse.) i have two half-sovereigns here.

brendel. oh, well, never mind. i may as well take them. i can always
get change in town. thanks, in the meantime. remember that it was two
half-sovereigns i had. good-night, my own dear boy! good-night to you,
sir! (goes out by the door on the right, where rosmer takes leave of
him and shuts the door after him.)

kroll. good heavens--and that is the ulrik brendel of whom people once
thought that he would do great things!

rosmer. at all events he has had the courage to live his life in his
own way. i do not think that is such a small thing, after all.

kroll. what? a life like his? i almost believe he would have the power,
even now, to disturb all your ideas.

rosmer. no, indeed. i have come to a clear understanding with myself
now, upon all points.

kroll. i wish i could believe it, my dear rosmer. you are so dreadfully
susceptible to impressions from without.

rosmer. let us sit down. i want to have a talk with you.

kroll. by all means. (they sit down on the couch.)

rosmer (after a short pause). don't you think everything here looks
very pleasant and comfortable?

kroll. yes, it looks very pleasant and comfortable now--and peaceful.
you have made yourself a real home, rosmer. and i have lost mine.

rosmer. my dear fellow, do not say that. there may seem to be a rift
just now, but it will heal again.

kroll. never, never. the sting will always remain. things can never be
as they were before.

rosmer. i want to ask you something, kroll. you and i have been the
closest of friends now for so many years--does it seem to you
conceivable that anything could destroy our friendship?

kroll. i cannot imagine anything that could cause a breach between us.
what has put that into your head?

rosmer. well--your attaching such tremendous importance to similarity
of opinions and views.

kroll. certainly i do; but then we two hold pretty similar opinions at
all events on the most essential points.

rosmer (gently). no. not any longer.

kroll (trying to jump up from his seat). what is this?

rosmer (restraining him). no, you must sit still. please, kroll.

kroll. what does it all mean? i do not understand you. tell me,
straight out!

rosmer. a new summer has blossomed in my heart--my eyes have regained
the clearness of youth. and, accordingly, i am now standing where--

kroll. where? where are you standing?

rosmer. where your children are standing.

kroll. you? you! the thing is impossible! where do you say you are
standing?

rosmer. on the same side as laurits and hilda.

kroll (letting his head drop). an apostate. john rosmer an apostate.

rosmer. what you are calling apostasy ought to have made me feel
sincerely happy and fortunate; but for all that i have suffered keenly,
because i knew quite well it would cause you bitter sorrow.

kroll. rosmer, rosmer, i shall never get over this. (looks at him
sadly.) to think that you, too, could bring yourself to sympathise with
and join in the work of disorder and ruin that is playing havoc with
our unhappy country.

rosmer. it is the work of emancipation that i sympathise with.

kroll. oh yes, i know all about that. that is what it is called, by
both those who are leading the people astray and by their misguided
victims. but, be sure of this--you need expect no emancipation to be
the result of the spirit that relies on the poisoning of the whole of
our social life.

rosmer. i do not give my allegiance to the spirit that is directing
this, nor to any of those who are leading the fight. i want to try to
bring men of all shades of opinion together--as many as i can
reach--and bind them as closely together as i can. i want to live for
and devote all the strength that is in me to one end only--to create a
real public opinion in the country.

kroll. so you do not consider that we have sufficient public opinion!
i, for my part, consider that the whole lot of us are on the high road
to be dragged down into the mire where otherwise only the common people
would be wallowing.

rosmer. it is just for that reason that i have made up my mind as to
what should be the real task of public opinion.

kroll. what task?

rosmer. the task of making all our fellow-countrymen into men of
nobility.

kroll. all our fellow-countrymen--!

rosmer. as many as possible, at all events.

kroll. by what means?

rosmer. by emancipating their ideas and purifying their aspirations, it
seems to me.

kroll. you are a dreamer, rosmer. are you going to emancipate them? are
you going to purify them?

rosmer. no, my dear fellow--i can only try to awake the desire for it
in them. the doing of it rests with themselves.

kroll. and do you think they are capable of it?

rosmer. yes.

kroll. of their own power?

rosmer. yes, of their own power. there is no other that can do it.

kroll (getting up). is that speaking as befits a clergyman?

rosmer. i am a clergyman no longer.

kroll. yes, but--what of the faith you were brought up in?

rosmer. i have it no longer.

kroll. you have it no longer?

rosmer (getting up). i have given it up. i had to give it up, kroll.

kroll (controlling his emotion). i see. yes, yes. the one thing implies
the other. was that the reason, then, why you left the service of the
church?

rosmer. yes. when my mind was clearly made up--when i felt the
certainty that it was not merely a transitory temptation, but that it
was something that i would neither have the power nor the desire to
dismiss from my mind--then i took that step.

kroll. so it has been fermenting in your mind as long as that. and
we--your friends--have never been allowed to know anything of it.
rosmer, rosmer--how could you hide the sorrowful truth from us!

rosmer. because i considered it was a matter that only concerned
myself; and therefore i did not wish to cause you and my other friends
any unnecessary pain. i thought i should be able to live my life here
as i have done hitherto--peacefully and happily. i wanted to read, and
absorb myself in all the works that so far had been sealed books to
me--to familiarise myself thoroughly with the great world of truth and
freedom that has been disclosed to me now.

kroll. an apostate. every word you say bears witness to that. but, for
all that, why have you made this confession of your secret apostasy? or
why just at the present moment?

rosmer. you yourself have compelled me to it, kroll.

kroll. i? i have compelled you?

rosmer. when i heard of your violent behaviour at public meetings--when
i read the reports of all the vehement speeches you made there of all
your bitter attacks upon those that were on the other side--your
scornful censure of your opponents--oh, kroll, to think that
you--you--could be the man to do that!--then my eyes were opened to my
imperative duty. mankind is suffering from the strife that is going on
now, and we ought to bring peace and happiness and a spirit of
reconciliation into their souls. that is why i step forward now and
confess myself openly for what i am--and, besides, i want to put my
powers to the test, as well as others. could not you--from your
side--go with me in that, kroll?

kroll. never, as long as i live, will i make any alliance with the
forces of disorder in the community.

rosmer. well, let us at least fight with honourable weapons, since it
seems we must fight.

kroll. i can have nothing more to do with any one who does not think
with me on matters of vital importance, and i owe such a man no
consideration.

rosmer. does that apply even to me?

kroll. you yourself have broken with me, rosmer.

rosmer. but does this really mean a breach between us?

kroll. between us! it is a breach with all those who have hitherto
stood shoulder to shoulder with you. and now you must take the
consequences.

(rebecca comes in from the room on the right and opens the door wide.)

rebecca. well, that is done! we have started him off on the road to his
great sacrifice, and now we can go in to supper. will you come in, mr.
kroll?

kroll (taking his hat). good-night, miss west. this is no longer any
place for me.

rebecca (excitedly). what do you mean? (shuts the door and comes nearer
to the two men.) have you told him--?

rosmer. he knows now.

kroll. we shall not let you slip out of our hands, rosmer. we shall
compel you to come back to us again.

rosmer. i shall never find myself there any more.

kroll. we shall see. you are not the man to endure standing alone.

rosmer. i am not so entirely alone, even now. there are two of us to
bear the solitude together here.

kroll. ah! (a suspicion appears to cross his mind.) that too! beata's
words!

rosmer. beata's?

kroll (dismissing the thought from his mind). no, no--that was odious
of me. forgive me.

rosmer. what? what do you mean?

kroll. think no more about it. i am ashamed of it. forgive me--and
good-bye. (goes out by the door to the hall.)

rosmer (following him). kroll! we cannot end everything between us like
this. i will come and see you to-morrow.

kroll (turning round in the hall). you shall not set your foot in my
house. (takes his stick and goes.)

(rosmer stands for a while at the open door; then shuts it and comes
back into the room.)

rosmer. that does not matter, rebecca. we shall be able to go through
with it, for all that--we two trusty friends--you and i.

rebecca. what do you suppose he meant just now when he said he was
ashamed of himself?

rosmer. my dear girl, don't bother your head about that. he didn't even
believe what he meant, himself. but i will go and see him tomorrow.
goodnight!

rebecca. are you going up so early to-night--after this?

rosmer. as early to-night as i usually do. i feel such a sense of
relief now that it is over. you see, my dear rebecca, i am perfectly
calm--so you take it calmly, too. good-night.

rebecca. good-night, dear friend--and sleep well! (rosmer goes out by
the door to the lobby; then his footsteps are heard as he goes
upstairs. rebecca goes to the wall and rings a bell, which is answered
by mrs. helseth.) you can clear the table again, mrs. helseth. mr.
rosmer does not want anything, and mr. kroll has gone home.

mrs. helseth. gone home? what was wrong with him, miss?

rebecca (taking up her crochet-work). he prophesied that there was a
heavy storm brewing--

mrs. helseth. that is very strange, miss, because there isn't a scrap
of cloud in the sky.

rebecca. let us hope he doesn't meet the white horse. because i am
afraid it will not be long before we hear something of the family ghost.

mrs. helseth. god forgive you, miss--don't talk of such a dreadful
thing!

rebecca. oh, come, come!

mrs. helseth (lowering her voice). do you really think, miss, that some
one here is to go soon?

rebecca. not a bit of it. but there are so many sorts of white horses
in this world, mrs. helseth--well, good-night. i shall go to my room
now.

mrs. helseth. good-night, miss. (rebecca takes her work and goes out to
the right. mrs. helseth shakes her head, as she turns down the lamp,
and mutters to herself): lord--lord!--how queer miss west does talk
sometimes!




act ii


(scene. rosmer's study. the door into it is in the left-hand wall. at
the back of the room is a doorway with a curtain drawn back from it,
leading to his bedroom. on the right, a window, in front of which is a
writing-table strewn with books and papers. bookshelves and cupboards
on the walls. homely furniture. on the left, an old-fashioned sofa with
a table in front of it. rosmer, wearing a smoking-jacket, is sitting at
the writing-table on a high-backed chair. he is cutting and turning
over the leaves of a magazine, and dipping into it here and there. a
knock is heard at the door on the left.)

rosmer (without turning round). come in.

(rebecca comes in, wearing a morning wrapper.)

rebecca. good morning.

rosmer (still turning over the leaves of his book). good morning, dear.
do you want anything?

rebecca. only to ask if you have slept well?

rosmer. i went to sleep feeling so secure and happy. i did not even
dream. (turns round.) and you?

rebecca. thanks, i got to sleep in the early morning.

rosmer. i do not think i have felt so light-hearted for a long time as
i do to-day. i am so glad that i had the opportunity to say what i did.

rebecca. yes, you should not have been silent so long, john.

rosmer. i cannot understand how i came to be such a coward.

rebecca. i am sure it was not really from cowardice.

rosmer. yes, indeed. i can see that at bottom there was some cowardice
about it.

rebecca. so much the braver of you to face it as you did. (sits down
beside him on a chair by the writing-table.) but now i want to confess
something that i have done--something that you must not be vexed with
me about.

rosmer. vexed? my dear girl, how can you think--?

rebecca. yes, because i dare say it was a little presumptuous of me,
but--

rosmer. well, let me hear what it was.

rebecca. last night, when that ulrick brendel was going, i wrote him a
line or two to take to mortensgaard.

rosmer (a little doubtfully). but, my dear rebecca--what did you write,
then?

rebecca. i wrote that he would be doing you a service if he would
interest himself a little in that unfortunate man, and help him in any
way he could.

rosmer. my dear, you should not have done that. you have only done
brendel harm by doing so. and besides, mortensgaard is a man i
particularly wish to have nothing to do with. you know i have been at
loggerheads once with him already.

rebecca. but do you not think that now it might be a very good thing if
you got on to good terms with him again?

rosmer. i? with mortensgaard? for what reason, do you mean?

rebecca. well, because you cannot feel altogether secure now--since
this has come between you and your friends.

rosmer (looking at her and shaking his head). is it possible that you
think either kroll or any of the others would take a revenge on
me--that they could be capable of--

rebecca. in their first heat of indignation dear. no one can be certain
of that. i think, after the way mr. kroll took it--

rosmer. oh, you ought to know him better than that. kroll is an
honourable man, through and through. i will go into town this
afternoon, and have a talk with him. i will have a talk with them all.
oh, you will see how smoothly everything will go. (mrs. helseth comes
in by the door on the left.)

rebecca (getting up). what is it, mrs. helseth?

mrs. helseth. mr. kroll is downstairs in the hall, miss.

rosmer (getting up quickly). kroll!

rebecca. mr. kroll! what a surprise!

mrs. helseth. he asks if he may come up and speak to mr. rosmer.

rosmer (to rebecca). what did i say! (to mrs. helseth). of course he
may. (goes to the door and calls down the stairs.) come up, my dear
fellow! i am delighted to see you! (he stands holding the door open.
mrs. helseth goes out. rebecca draws the curtain over the doorway at
the back, and then begins to tidy the room. kroll comes in with his hat
in his hand.)

rosmer (quietly, and with some emotion). i knew quite well it would not
be the last time--

kroll. to-day i see the matter in quite a different light from
yesterday.

rosmer. of course you do, kroll! of course you do! you have been
thinking things over--

kroll. you misunderstand me altogether. (puts his hat down on the
table.) it is important that i should speak to you alone.

rosmer. why may not miss west--?

rebecca. no, no, mr. rosmer. i will go.

kroll (looking meaningly at her). and i see i ought to apologise to
you, miss west, for coming here so early in the morning. i see i have
taken you by surprise, before you have had time to--

rebecca (with a start). why so? do you find anything out of place in
the fact of my wearing a morning wrapper at home here?

kroll. by no means! besides, i have no knowledge of what customs may
have grown up at rosmersholm.

rosmer. kroll, you are not the least like yourself to-day.

rebecca. i will wish you good morning, mr. kroll. (goes out to the
left.)

kroll. if. you will allow me-- (sits down on the couch.)

rosmer. yes, my dear fellow, let us make ourselves comfortable and have
a confidential talk. (sits down on a chair facing kroll.)

kroll. i have not been able to close an eye since yesterday. i lay all
night, thinking and thinking.

rosmer. and what have you got to say to-day?

kroll. it will take me some time, rosmer. let me begin with a sort of
introduction. i can give you some news of ulrick brendel.

rosmer. has he been to see you?

kroll. no. he took up his quarters in a low-class tavern--in the lowest
kind of company, of course; drank, and stood drinks to others, as long
as he had any money left; and then began to abuse the whole lot of them
as a contemptible rabble--and, indeed, as far as that goes he was quite
right. but the result was, that he got a thrashing and was thrown out
into the gutter.

rosmer. i see he is altogether incorrigible.

kroll. he had pawned the coat you gave him, too, but that is going to
be redeemed for him. can you guess by whom?

rosmer. by yourself, perhaps?

kroll. no. by our noble friend mr. mortensgaard.

rosmer. is that so?

kroll. i am informed that mr. brendel's first visit was paid to the
"idiot" and  "plebeian".

rosmer. well, it was very lucky for him--

kroll. indeed it was. (leans over the table, towards rosmer.) now i am
coming to a matter of which, for the sake of our old--our
former--friendship, it is my duty to warn you.

rosmer. my dear fellow, what is that?

kroll. it is this; that certain games are going on behind your back in
this house.

rosmer. how can you think that? is it rebec--is it miss west you are
alluding to?

kroll. precisely. and i can quite understand it on her part; she has
been accustomed, for such a long time now, to do as she likes here. but
nevertheless--

rosmer. my dear kroll, you are absolutely mistaken. she and i have no
secrets from one another about anything whatever.

kroll. then has she confessed to you that she has been corresponding
with the editor of the "searchlight"?

rosmer. oh, you mean the couple of lines she wrote to him on ulrik
brendel's behalf?

kroll. you have found that out, then? and do you approve of her being
on terms of this sort with that scurrilous hack, who almost every week
tries to pillory me for my attitude in my school and out of it?

rosmer. my dear fellow, i don't suppose that side of the question has
ever occurred to her. and in any case, of course she has entire freedom
of action, just as i have myself.

kroll. indeed? well, i suppose that is quite in accordance with the new
turn your views have taken--because i suppose miss west looks at things
from the same standpoint as you?

rosmer. she does. we two have worked our way forward in complete
companionship.

kroll (looking at him and shaking his head slowly). oh, you blind,
deluded man!

rosmer. i? what makes you say that?

kroll. because i dare not--i will not--think the worst. no, no, let me
finish what i want to say. am i to believe that you really prize my
friendship, rosmer? and my respect, too? do you?

rosmer. surely i need not answer that question.

kroll. well, but there are other things that require answering--that
require full explanation on your part. will you submit to it if i hold
a sort of inquiry--?

rosmer. an inquiry?

kroll. yes, if i ask you questions about one or two things that it may
be painful for you to recall to mind. for instance, the matter of your
apostasy--well, your emancipation, if you choose to call it so--is
bound up with so much else for which, for your own sake, you ought to
account to me.

rosmer. my dear fellow, ask me about anything you please. i have
nothing to conceal.

kroll. well, then, tell me this--what do you yourself believe was the
real reason of beata's making away with herself?

rosmer. can you have any doubt? or perhaps i should rather say, need
one look for reasons for what an unhappy sick woman, who is
unaccountable for her actions, may do?

kroll. are you certain that beata was so entirely unaccountable for her
actions? the doctors, at all events, did not consider that so
absolutely certain.

rosmer. if the doctors had ever seen her in the state in which i have
so often seen her, both night and day, they would have had no doubt
about it.

kroll. i did not doubt it either, at the time.

rosmer. of course not. it was impossible to doubt it, unfortunately.
you remember what i told you of her ungovernable, wild fits of
passion--which she expected me to reciprocate. she terrified me! and
think how she tortured herself with baseless self-reproaches in the
last years of her life!

kroll. yes, when she knew that she would always be childless.

rosmer. well, think what it meant--to be perpetually in the clutches of
such--agony of mind over a thing that she was not in the slightest
degree responsible for--! are you going to suggest that she was
accountable for her actions?

kroll. hm!--do you remember whether at that time you had, in the house
any books dealing with the purport of marriage--according to the
advanced views of to-day?

rosmer. i remember miss west's lending me a work of the kind. she
inherited dr. west's library, you know. but, my dear kroll, you surely
do not suppose that we were so imprudent as to let the poor sick
creature get wind of any such ideas? i can solemnly swear that we were
in no way to blame. it was the overwrought nerves of her own brain that
were responsible for these frantic aberrations.

kroll. there is one thing, at any rate, that i can tell you now, and
that is that your poor tortured and overwrought beata put an end to her
own life in order that yours might be happy--and that you might be free
to live as you pleased.

rosmer (starting half up from his chair). what do you mean by that?

kroll. you must listen to me quietly, rosmer--because now i can speak
of it. during the last year of her life she came twice to see me, to
tell me what she suffered from her fears and her despair.

rosmer. on that point?

kroll. no. the first time she came she declared that you were on the
high road to apostasy--that you were going to desert the faith that
your father had taught you.

rosmer (eagerly). what you say is impossible, kroll!--absolutely
impossible! you must be wrong about that.

kroll. why?

rosmer. because as long as beata lived i was still doubting and
fighting with myself. and i fought out that fight alone and in the
completest secrecy. i do not imagine that even rebecca--

kroll. rebecca?

rosmer. oh, well--miss west. i call her rebecca for the sake of
convenience.

kroll. so i have observed.

rosmer. that is why it is so incomprehensible to me that beata should
have had any suspicion of it. why did she never speak to me about
it?--for she never did, by a single word.

kroll. poor soul--she begged and implored me to speak to you.

rosmer. then why did you never do so?

kroll. do you think i had a moment's doubt, at that time, that her mind
was unhinged? such an accusation as that, against a man like you! well,
she came to see me again, about a month later. she seemed calmer then;
but, as she was going away, she said: "they may expect to see the white
horse soon at rosmersholm."

rosmer. yes, i know--the white horse. she often used to talk about that.

kroll. and then, when i tried to distract her from such unhappy
thoughts, she only answered: "i have not much time left; for john must
marry rebecca immediately now."

rosmer (almost speechless). what are you saying! i marry--!

kroll. that was on a thursday afternoon. on the saturday evening she
threw herself from the footbridge into the millrace.

rosmer. and you never warned us!

kroll. well, you know yourself how constantly she used to say that she
was sure she would die before long.

rosmer. yes, i know. but, all the same, you ought to have warned us!

kroll. i did think of doing so. but then it was too late.

rosmer. but since then, why have you not--? why have you kept all this
to yourself?

kroll. what good would it have done for me to come here and add to your
pain and distress? of course i thought the whole thing was merely wild,
empty fancy--until yesterday evening.

rosmer. then you do not think so any longer?

kroll. did not beata see clearly enough, when she saw that you were
going to fall away from your childhood's faith?

rosmer (staring in front of him). yes, i cannot understand that. it is
the most incomprehensible thing in the world to me.

kroll. incomprehensible or not, the thing is true. and now i ask you,
rosmer, how much truth is there in her other accusation?--the last one,
i mean.

rosmer. accusation? was that an accusation, then?

kroll. perhaps you did not notice how it was worded. she said she meant
to stand out of the way. why? well?

rosmer. in order that i might marry rebecca, apparently.

kroll. that was not quite how it was worded. beata expressed herself
differently. she said "i have not much time left; for john must marry
rebecca immediately now."

rosmer (looks at him for a moment; then gets up). now i understand you,
kroll.

kroll. and if you do? what answer have you to make?

rosmer (in an even voice, controlling himself). to such an
unheard-of--? the only fitting answer would be to point to the door.

kroll (getting up). very good.

rosmer (standing face to face with him). listen to me. for considerably
more than a year to be precise, since beata's death--rebecca west and i
have lived here alone at rosmersholm. all that time you have known of
the charge beata made against us; but i have never for one moment seen
you appear the least scandalised at our living together here.

kroll. i never knew, till yesterday evening, that it was a case of an
apostate man and an "emancipated" woman living together.

rosmer. ah! so then you do not believe in any purity of life among
apostates or emancipated folk? you do not believe that they may have
the instinct of morality ingrained in their natures?

kroll. i have no particular confidence in the kind of morality that is
not rooted in the church's faith.

rosmer. and you mean that to apply to rebecca and myself?--to my
relations with rebecca?

kroll. i cannot make any departure, in favour of you two, from my
opinion that there is certainly no very wide gulf between free thinking
and--ahem!

rosmer. and what?

kroll. and free love, since you force me to say it.

rosmer (gently). and you are not ashamed to say that to me!--you, who
have known me ever since i was a boy.

kroll. it is just for that reason. i know how easily you allow yourself
to be influenced by those you associate with. and as for your
rebecca--well, your miss west, then--to tell the truth, we know very
little about her. to cut the matter short, rosmer--i am not going to
give you up. and you, on your part, ought to try and save yourself in
time.

rosmer. save myself? how--? (mrs. helseth looks in through the door on
the left.) what do you want?

mrs. helseth. i wanted to ask miss west to come down, sir.

rosmer. miss west is not up here.

mrs. helseth. indeed, sir? (looks round the room.) that is very
strange. (goes out.)

rosmer. you were saying--?

kroll. listen to me. as to what may have gone on here in secret while
beata was alive, and as to what may be still going on here, i have no
wish to inquire more closely. you were, of course, extremely unhappy in
your marriage--and to some extent that may be urged in your excuse--

rosmer. oh, how little you really know me!

kroll. do not interrupt me. what i want to say is this. if you
definitely must continue living with miss west, it is absolutely
necessary that you should conceal the revolution of opinion--i mean the
distressing apostasy--that she has beguiled you into. let me speak! let
me speak! i say that, if you are determined to go on with this folly,
for heaven's sake hold any variety of ideas or opinions or beliefs you
like--but keep your opinions to yourself. it is a purely personal
matter, and there is not the slightest necessity to go proclaiming it
all over the countryside.

rosmer. it is a necessity for me to abandon a false and equivocal
position.

kroll. but you have a duty towards the traditions of your family,
rosmer! remember that! from time immemorial rosmersholm has been a
stronghold of discipline and order, of respect and esteem for all that
the best people in our community have upheld and sanctioned. the whole
neighbourhood has taken its tone from rosmersholm. if the report gets
about that you yourself have broken with what i may call the rosmer
family tradition, it will evoke an irreparable state of unrest.

rosmer. my dear kroll, i cannot see the matter in that light. it seems
to me that it is my imperative duty to bring a little light and
happiness into the place where the race of rosmers has spread darkness
and oppression for all these long years.

kroll (looking severely at him). yes, that would be a worthy action for
the man with whom the race will disappear. let such things alone, my
friend. it is no suitable task for you. you were meant to lead the
peaceful life of a student.

rosmer. yes, that may be so. but nevertheless i want to try and play my
humble part in the struggles of life.

kroll. the struggles of life! do you know what that will mean for you?
it will mean war to the death with all your friends.

rosmer (quietly). i do not imagine they are all such fanatics as you.

kroll. you are a simple-minded creature, rosmer--an inexperienced
creature. you have no suspicion of the violence of the storm that will
burst upon you. (mrs. helseth slightly opens the door on the left.)

mrs. helseth. miss west wishes me to ask you, sir

rosmer. what is it?

mrs. helseth. there is some one downstairs that wishes to speak to you
for a minute, sir.

rosmer. is it the gentleman that was here yesterday afternoon, by any
chance?

mrs. helseth. no, it is that mr. mortensgaard.

rosmer. mortensgaard?

kroll. aha! so matters have got as far as that already, have they!

rosmer. what does he want with me? why did you not send him away?

mrs. helseth. miss west told me to ask you if he might come up.

rosmer. tell him i am engaged, and--

kroll (to mrs. helseth). no; show him up, please. (mrs. helseth goes
out. kroll takes up his hat.) i quit the field--temporarily. but we
have not fought the decisive action yet.

rosmer. as truly as i stand here, kroll, i have absolutely nothing to
do with mortensgaard.

kroll. i do not believe you any longer on any point. under no
circumstances shall i have any faith in you after this. it is war to
the knife now. we shall try if we cannot make you powerless to do any
harm.

rosmer. oh, kroll--how you have sunk! how low you have sunk!

kroll. i? and a man like you has the face to say so? remember beata!

rosmer. are you harking back to that again!

kroll. no. you must solve the riddle of the millrace as your conscience
will allow you--if you have any conscience still left. (peter
mortensgaard comes in softly and quietly, by the door on the left. he
is a short, slightly built man with sparse reddish hair and beard.
kroll gives him a look of hatred.) the "searchlight" too, i see.
lighted at rosmersholm! (buttons up his coat.) that leaves me no doubt
as to the course i should steer.

mortensgaard (quietly). the "searchlight" will always be ready burning
to light mr. kroll home.

kroll. yes, you have shown me your goodwill for a long time. to be sure
there is a commandment that forbids us to bear false witness against
our neighbour--

mortensgaard. mr. kroll has no need to instruct me in the commandments.

kroll. not even in the sixth?

rosmer. kroll--!

mortensgaard. if i needed such instruction, mr. rosmer is the most
suitable person to give it me.

kroll (with scarcely concealed scorn). mr. rosmer? oh yes, the reverend
mr. rosmer is undoubtedly the most suitable man for that! i hope you
will enjoy yourselves, gentlemen. (goes out and slams the door after
him.)

rosmer (stands looking at the door, and says to himself). yes, yes--it
had to be so. (turns round.) will you tell me, mr. mortensgaard, what
has brought you out here to see me?

mortensgaard. it was really miss west i wanted to see. i thought i
ought to thank her for the kind letter i received from her yesterday.

rosmer. i know she has written to you. have you had a talk with her?

mortensgaard. yes, a little. (smiles slightly.) i hear that there has
been a change of views in certain respects at rosmersholm.

rosmer. my views have changed to a very considerable extent; i might
almost say entirely.

mortensgaard. that is what miss west said. and that was why she thought
i ought to come up and have a little chat with you about this.

rosmer. about what, mr. mortensgaard?

mortensgaard. may i have your permission to announce in the
"searchlight" that you have altered your opinions, and are going to
devote yourself to the cause of free thought and progress?

rosmer. by all means. i will go so far as to ask you to make the
announcement.

mortensgaard. then it shall appear to-morrow. it will be a great and
weighty piece of news that the reverend mr. rosmer of rosmersholm has
made up his mind to join the forces of light in that direction too.

rosmer. i do not quite understand you.

mortensgaard. what i mean is that it implies the gain of strong moral
support for our party every time we win over an earnest,
christian-minded adherent.

rosmer (with some astonishment). then you don't know--? did miss west
not tell you that as well?

mortensgaard. what, mr. rosmer? miss west was in a considerable hurry.
she told me to come up, and that i would hear the rest of it from
yourself.

rosmer. very well, then; let me tell you that i have cut myself free
entirely--on every side. i have now, no connection of any kind with the
tenets of the church. for the future such matters have not the smallest
signification for me.

mortensgaard (looking at him in perplexity). well, if the moon had
fallen down from the sky, i could not be more--! to think that i should
ever hear you yourself renounce--!

rosmer. yes, i stand now where you have stood for a long time. you can
announce that in the "searchlight" to-morrow too.

mortensgaard. that, too? no, my dear mr. rosmer--you must excuse
me--but it is not worth touching on that side of the matter.

rosmer. not touch on it?

mortensgaard. not at first, i think.

rosmer. but i do not understand--

mortensgaard. well, it is like this, mr. rosmer. you are not as
familiar with all the circumstances of the case as i am, i expect. but
if you, too, have joined the forces of freedom--and if you, as miss
west says you do, mean to take part in the movement--i conclude you do
so with the desire to be as useful to the movement as you possibly can,
in practice as well as, in theory.

rosmer. yes, that is my most sincere wish.

mortensgaard. very well. but i must impress on you, mr. rosmer, that if
you come forward openly with this news about your defection from the
church, you will tie your own hands immediately.

rosmer. do you think so?

mortensgaard. yes, you may be certain that there is not much that you
would be able to do hereabouts. and besides, mr. rosmer, we have quite
enough freethinkers already--indeed, i was going to say we have too
many of those gentry. what the party needs is a christian
element--something that every one must respect. that is what we want
badly. and for that reason it is most advisable that you should hold
your tongue about any matters that do not concern the public. that is
my opinion.

rosmer. i see. then you would not risk having anything to do with me if
i were to confess my apostasy openly?

mortensgaard (shaking his head). i should not like to, mr. rosmer.
lately i have made it a rule never to support anybody or anything that
is opposed to the interests of the church.

rosmer. have you, then, entered the fold of the church again lately?

mortensgaard. that is another matter altogether.

rosmer. oh, that is how it is. yes, i understand you now.

mortensgaard. mr. rosmer--you ought to remember that i, of all people,
have not absolute freedom of action.

rosmer. what hampers you?

mortensgaard. what hampers me is that i am a marked man.

rosmer. ah--of course.

mortensgaard. a marked man, mr. rosmer. and you, of all people, ought
to remember that--because you were responsible, more than any one else,
for my being branded.

rosmer. if i had stood then where i stand now, i should have handled
the affair more judiciously.

mortensgaard. i think so too. but it is too late now; you have branded
me, once for all--branded me for life. i do not suppose you can fully
realise what such a thing means. but it is possible that you may soon
feel the smart of it yourself now, mr. rosmer.

rosmer. i?

mortensgaard. yes. you surely do not suppose that mr. kroll and his
gang will be inclined to forgive a rupture such as yours? and the
"county news" is going to be pretty bloodthirsty, i hear. it may very
well come to pass that you will be a marked man, too.

rosmer. on personal grounds, mr. mortensgaard, i feel myself to be
invulnerable. my conduct does not offer any point of attack.

mortensgaard (with a quiet smile). that is saying a good deal, mr.
rosmer.

rosmer. perhaps it is. but i have the right to say as much.

mortensgaard. even if you were inclined to overhaul your conduct as
thoroughly as you once overhauled mine?

rosmer. you say that very strangely. what are you driving at?--is it
anything definite?

mortensgaard. yes, there is one definite thing--no more than a single
one. but it might be quite awkward enough if malicious opponents got a
hint of it.

rosmer. will you have the kindness to tell me what on earth it is?

mortensgaard. can you not guess, mr. rosmer?

rosmer. no, not for a moment.

mortensgaard. all right. i must come out with it, then. i have in my
possession a remarkable letter, that was written here at rosmersholm.

rosmer. miss west's letter, you mean? is it so remarkable?

mortensgaard. no, that letter is not remarkable. but i received a
letter from this house on another occasion.

rosmer. from miss west?

mortensgaard. no, mr. rosmer.

rosmer. well, from whom, then? from whom?

mortensgaard. from your late wife.

rosmer. from my wife? you had a letter from my wife?

mortensgaard. yes, i did.

rosmer. when?

mortensgaard. it was during the poor lady's last days. it must be about
a year and a half ago now. and that is the letter that is so remarkable.

rosmer. surely you know that my wife's mind was affected at that time?

mortensgaard. i know there were a great many people who thought so.
but, in my opinion, no one would have imagined anything of the kind
from the letter. when i say the letter is a remarkable one, i mean
remarkable in quite another way.

rosmer. and what in the world did my poor wife find to write to you
about?

mortensgaard. i have the letter at home. it begins more or less to the
effect that she is living in perpetual terror and dread, because of the
fact that there are so many evilly disposed people about her whose only
desire is to do you harm and mischief.

rosmer. me?

mortensgaard. yes, so she says. and then follows the most remarkable
part of it all. shall i tell you, mr. rosmer?

rosmer. of course! tell me everything, without any reserve.

mortensgaard. the poor lady begs and entreats me to be magnanimous. she
says that she knows it was you, who got me dismissed from my post as
schoolmaster, and implores me most earnestly not to revenge myself upon
you.

rosmer. what way did she think you could revenge yourself, then?

mortensgaard. the letter goes on to say that if i should hear that
anything sinful was going on at rosmersholm, i was not to believe a
word of it; that it would be only the work of wicked folk who were
spreading the rumours on purpose to do you harm.

rosmer. does the letter say that?

mortensgaard. you may read it at your convenience, mr. rosmer.

rosmer. but i cannot understand--? what did she imagine there could be
any wicked rumours about?

mortensgaard. in the first place, that you had broken away from the
faith of your childhood. mrs. rosmer denied that absolutely--at that
time. and, in the next place--ahem!

rosmer. in the next place?

mortensgaard. well, in the next place she writes--though rather
confusedly--that she has no knowledge of any sinful relations existing
at rosmersholm; that she has never been wronged in any way; and that if
any rumours of that sort should get about, she entreats me not to
allude to them in the "searchlight".

rosmer. does she mention any names?

mortensgaard. no.

rosmer. who brought you the letter?

mortensgaard. i promised not to tell that. it was brought to me one
evening after dark.

rosmer. if you had made inquiries at the time, you would have learnt
that my poor unhappy wife was not fully accountable for her actions.

mortensgaard. i did make inquiries, mr. rosmer; but i must say i did
not get exactly that impression.

rosmer. not?--but why have you chosen this moment to enlighten me as to
the existence of this old crazy letter?

mortensgaard. with the object of advising you to be extremely cautious,
mr. rosmer.

rosmer. as to my way of life, do you mean?

mortensgaard. yes. you must remember that for the future you will not
be unassailable.

rosmer. so you persist in thinking that i have something to conceal
here?

mortensgaard. i do not see any reason why a man of emancipated ideas
should refrain from living his life as fully as possible. only, as i
have already said, you should be cautious in future. if rumours should
get about of anything that offends people's prejudices, you may be
quite certain that the whole cause of freedom of thought will suffer
for it. good-bye, mr. rosmer.

rosmer. good-bye.

mortensgaard. i shall go straight to the printing-office now and have
the great piece of news inserted in the "searchlight".

rosmer. put it all in.

mortensgaard. i will put in as much as there is any need for the public
to know. (bows, and goes out. rosmer stands at the door, while
mortensgaard goes downstairs. the front door is heard shutting.)

rosmer (still standing in the doorway, calls softly). rebecca!
reb--ahem! (calls loudly.) mrs. helseth--is miss west downstairs?

mrs. helseth (from below). no, sir, she is not here.

(the curtain at the end of the room is drawn back, disclosing rebecca
standing in the doorway.)

rebecca. john!

rosmer (turning round). what! were you in there, in my bedroom! my
dear, what were you doing there?

rebecca (going up to him). i have been listening.

rosmer. rebecca! could you do a thing like that?

rebecca. indeed i could. it was so horrid the way he said that--about
my morning wrapper.

rosmer. ah, so you were in there too when kroll--?

rebecca. yes. i wanted to know what was at the bottom of his mind.

rosmer. you know i would have told you.

rebecca. i scarcely think you would have told me everything--certainly
not in his own words.

rosmer. did you hear everything, then?

rebecca. most of it, i think. i had to go down for a moment when
mortensgaard came.

rosmer. and then came up again?

rebecca. do not take it ill of me, dear friend.

rosmer. do anything that you think right and proper. you have full
freedom of action.--but what do you say to it all, rebecca? ah, i do
not think i have ever stood so much in need of you as i do to-day.

rebecca. surely both you and i have been prepared for what would happen
some day.

rosmer. no, no--not for this.

rebecca. not for this?

rosmer. it is true that i used to think that sooner or later our
beautiful pure friendship would come to be attacked by calumny and
suspicion--not on kroll's part, for i never would have believed such a
thing of him--but on the part of the coarse-minded and ignoble-eyed
crowd. yes, indeed; i had good reason enough for so jealously drawing a
veil of concealment over our compact. it was a dangerous secret.

rebecca. why should we pay any heed to what all these other people
think? you and i know that we have nothing to reproach ourselves with.

rosmer. i? nothing to reproach myself with? it is true enough that i
thought so until to-day. but now, now, rebecca--

rebecca. yes? now?

rosmer. how am i to account to myself for beata's horrible accusation?

rebecca (impetuously). oh, don't talk about beata! don't think about
beata any more! she is dead, and you seemed at last to have been able
to get away from the thought of her.

rosmer. since i have learnt of this, it seems just as if she had come
to life again in some uncanny fashion.

rebecca. oh no--you must not say that, john! you must not!

rosmer. i tell you it is so. we must try and get to the bottom of it.
how can she have strayed into such a woeful misunderstanding of me?

rebecca. surely you too are not beginning to doubt that she was very
nearly insane?

rosmer. well, i cannot deny it is just of that fact that i feel i
cannot be so altogether certain any longer. and besides if it were so--

rebecca. if it were so? what then?

rosmer. what i mean is--where are we to look for the actual cause of
her sick woman's fancies turning into insanity?

rebecca. what good can it possibly do for you to indulge in such
speculations!

rosmer. i cannot do otherwise, rebecca. i cannot let this doubt go on
gnawing at my heart, however unwilling i may be to face it.

rebecca. but it may become a real danger to you to be perpetually
dwelling on this one lugubrious topic.

rosmer (walking about restlessly and absorbed in the idea). i must have
betrayed myself in some way or other. she must have noticed how happy i
began to feel from the day you came to us.

rebecca. yes; but dear, even if that were so--

rosmer. you may be sure she did not fail to notice that we read the
same books; that we sought one another's company, and discussed every
new topic together. but i cannot understand it--because i was always so
careful to spare her. when i look back, it seems to me that i did
everything i could to keep her apart from our lives. or did i not,
rebecca?

rebecca. yes, yes--undoubtedly you did.

rosmer. and so did you, too. and notwithstanding that--! oh, it is
horrible to think of! to think that here she was--with her affection
all distorted by illness--never saying a word--watching us--noticing
everything and--and--misconstruing everything.

rebecca (wringing her hands). oh, i never ought to have come to
rosmersholm.

rosmer. just think what she must have suffered in silence! think of all
the horrible things her poor diseased brain must have led her to
believe about us and store up in her mind about us! did she never speak
to you of anything that could give you any kind of clue?

rebecca (as if startled). to me! do you suppose i should have remained
here a day longer, if she had?

rosmer. no, no--that is obvious. what a fight she must have fought--and
fought alone, rebecca! in despair, and all alone. and then, in the end,
the poignant misery of her victory--which was also her accusation of
us--in the mill-race! (throws himself into a chair, rests his elbows on
the table, and hides his face in his hands.)

rebecca (coming quietly up behind him). listen to me, john. if it were
in your power to call beata back--to you--to rosmersholm--would you do
it?

rosmer. how can i tell what i would do or what i would not do! i have
no thoughts for anything but the one thing which is irrevocable.

rebecca. you ought to be beginning to live now, john. you were
beginning. you had freed yourself completely on all sides. you were
feeling so happy and so light-hearted

rosmer. i know--that is true enough. and then comes this overwhelming
blow.

rebecca (standing behind him, with her arms on the back of his chair).
how beautiful it was when we used to sit there downstairs in the
dusk--and helped each other to plan our lives out afresh. you wanted to
catch hold of actual life--the actual life of the day, as you used to
say. you wanted to pass from house to house like a guest who brought
emancipation with him--to win over men's thoughts and wills to your
own--to fashion noble men all around you, in a wider and wider
circle--noble men!

rosmer. noble men and happy men.

rebecca. yes, happy men.

rosmer. because it is happiness that gives the soul nobility, rebecca.

rebecca. do you not think suffering too? the deepest suffering?

rosmer. yes, if one can win through it--conquer it--conquer it
completely.

rebecca. that is what you must do.

rosmer (shaking his head sadly). i shall never conquer this completely.
there will always be a doubt confronting me--a question. i shall never
again be able to lose myself in the enjoyment of what makes life so
wonderfully beautiful.

rebecca (speaking over the back of his chair, softly). what do you
mean, john?

rosmer (looking up at her). calm and happy innocence.

rebecca (taking a step backwards). of course. innocence. (a short
silence.)

rosmer (resting his head on his hands with his elbows on the table, and
looking straight in front of him). how ingeniously--how
systematically--she must have put one thing together with another!
first of all she begins to have a suspicion as to my orthodoxy. how on
earth did she get that idea in her mind? any way, she did; and the idea
grew into a certainty. and then--then, of course, it was easy for her
to think everything else possible. (sits up in his chair and, runs his
hands through his hair.) the wild fancies i am haunted with! i shall
never get quit of them. i am certain of that--certain. they will always
be starting up before me to remind me of the dead.

rebecca. like the white horse of rosmersholm.

rosmer. yes, like that. rushing at me out of the dark--out of the
silence.

rebecca. and, because of this morbid fancy of yours, you are going to
give up the hold you had just gained upon real life?

rosmer. you are right, it seems hard--hard, rebecca. but i have no
power of choice in the matter. how do you think i could ever get the
mastery over it?

rebecca (standing behind his chair). by making new ties for yourself.

rosmer (starts, and looks up). new ties?

rebecca. yes, new ties with the outside world. live, work, do
something! do not sit here musing and brooding over insoluble
conundrums.

rosmer (getting up). new ties! (walks across the room, turns at the
door and comes back again.) a question occurs to my mind. has it not
occurred to you too, rebecca?

rebecca (catching her breath). let me hear what it is.

rosmer. what do you suppose will become of the tie between us, after
to-day?

rebecca. i think surely our friendship can endure, come what may.

rosmer. yes, but that is not exactly what i meant. i was thinking of
what brought us together from the first, what links us so closely to
one another--our common belief in the possibility of a man and a woman
living together in chastity.

rebecca. yes, yes--what of it?

rosmer. what i mean is--does not such a tie as that--such a tie as
ours--seem to belong properly to a life lived in quiet, happy
peacefulness?

rebecca. well?

rosmer. but now i see stretching before me a life of strife and unrest
and violent emotions. for i mean to live my life, rebecca! i am not
going to let myself be beaten to the ground by the dread of what may
happen. i am not going to have my course of life prescribed for me,
either by any living soul or by another.

rebecca. no, no--do not! be a free man in everything, john!

rosmer. do you understand what is in my mind, then? do you not know? do
you not see how i could best win my freedom from all these harrowing
memories from the whole sad past?

rebecca. tell me!

rosmer. by setting up, in opposition to them, a new and living reality.

rebecca (feeling for the back of the chair). a living--? what do you
mean?

rosmer (coming closer to her). rebecca--suppose i asked you now--will
you be my second wife?

rebecca (is speechless for a moment, then gives a cry of joy). your
wife! yours--! i!

rosmer. yes--let us try what that will do. we two shall be one. there
must no longer be any empty place left by the dead in this house.

rebecca. i--in beata's place--?

rosmer. and then that chapter of my life will be closed--completely
closed, never to be reopened.

rebecca (in a low, trembling voice). do you think so, john?

rosmer. it must be so! it must! i cannot--i will not--go through life
with a dead body on my back. help me to throw it off, rebecca; and then
let us stifle all memories in our sense of freedom, in joy, in passion.
you shall be to me the only wife i have ever had.

rebecca (controlling herself). never speak of this, again. i will never
be your wife.

rosmer. what! never? do you think, then, that you could not learn to
love me? is not our friendship already tinged with love?

rebecca (stopping her ears, as if in fear). don't speak like that,
john! don't say such things!

rosmer (catching her by the arm). it is true! there is a growing
possibility in the tie that is between us. i can see that you feel
that, as well as i--do you not, rebecca?

rebecca (controlling herself completely). listen. let me tell you
this--if you persist in this, i shall leave rosmersholm.

rosmer. leave rosmersholm! you! you cannot do that. it is impossible.

rebecca. it is still more impossible for me to become your wife. never,
as long as i live, can i be that.

rosmer (looks at her in surprise). you say "can"--and you say it so
strangely. why can you not?

rebecca (taking both his hands in hers). dear friend--for your own
sake, as well as for mine, do not ask me why. (lets go of his hands.)
so, john. (goes towards the door on the left.)

rosmer. for the future the world will hold only one question for
me--why?

rebecca (turns and looks at him). in that case everything is at an end.

rosmer. between you and me?

rebecca. yes.

rosmer. things can never be at an end between us two. you shall never
leave rosmersholm.

rebecca (with her hand on the door-handle). no, i dare say i shall not.
but, all the same, if you question me again, it will mean the end of
everything.

rosmer. the end of everything, all the same? how--?

rebecca. because then i shall go the way beata went. now you know, john.

rosmer. rebecca--!

rebecca (stops at the door and nods: slowly). now you know. (goes out.)

rosmer (stares in bewilderment at the shut door, and says to himself):
what can it mean?




act iii


(scene. the sitting-room at rosmersholm. the window and the hall-door
are open. the morning sun is seen shining outside. rebecca, dressed as
in act i., is standing by the window, watering and arranging the
flowers. her work is lying on the armchair. mrs. helseth is going round
the room with a feather brush, dusting the furniture.)

rebecca (after a short pause). i wonder why mr. rosmer is so late in
coming down to-day?

mrs. helseth. oh, he is often as late as this, miss. he is sure to be
down directly.

rebecca. have you seen anything of him?

mrs. helseth. no, miss, except that as i took his coffee into his study
he went into his bedroom to finish dressing.

rebecca. the reason i ask is that he was not very well yesterday.

mrs. helseth. no, he did not look well. it made me wonder whether
something had gone amiss between him and his brother-in-law.

rebecca. what do you suppose could go amiss between them?

mrs. helseth. i can't say, miss. perhaps it was that fellow
mortensgaard set them at loggerheads.

rebecca. it is quite possible. do you know anything of this peter
mortensgaard?

mrs. helseth. not i! how could you think so, miss--a man like that!

rebecca. because of that horrid paper he edits, you mean?

mrs. helseth. not only because of that, miss. i suppose you have heard
that a certain married woman, whose husband had deserted her, had a
child by him?

rebecca. i have heard it; but of course that was long before i came
here.

mrs. helseth. bless me, yes--he was quite a young man then. but she
might have had more sense than he had. he wanted to marry her, too, but
that could not be done; and so he had to pay heavily for it. but since
then--my word!--mortensgaard has risen in the world. there are lots of
people who run after him now.

rebecca. i believe most of the poor people turn to him first when they
are in any trouble.

mrs. helseth. oh, not only the poor people, miss--

rebecca (glancing at her unobserved). indeed?

mrs. helseth (standing at the sofa, dusting vigorously). people you
would least expect, sometimes, miss.

rebecca (arranging the flowers). yes, but that is only an idea of
yours, mrs. helseth. you cannot know that for certain.

mrs. helseth. you think i don't know anything about that for certain,
do you, miss? indeed i do. because--if i must let out the secret at
last--i carried a letter to mortensgaard myself once.

rebecca (turns round). no--did you!

mrs. helseth. yes, that i did. and that letter, let me tell you, was
written here--at rosmersholm.

rebecca. really, mrs. helseth?

mrs. helseth. i give you my word it was, miss. and it was written on
good note-paper--and sealed with beautiful red sealing-wax.

rebecca. and you were entrusted with the delivery of it? dear mrs.
helseth, it is not very difficult to guess whom it was from.

mrs. helseth. who, then?

rebecca. naturally, it was something that poor mrs. rosmer in her
invalid state--

mrs. helseth. well, you have mentioned her name, miss--not i.

rebecca. but what was in the letter?--no, of course, you cannot know
that.

mrs. helseth. hm!--it is just possible i may know, all the same.

rebecca. did she tell you what she was writing about, then?

mrs. helseth. no, she did not do that. but when mortensgaard had read
it, he set to work and cross-questioned me, so that i got a very good
idea of what was in it.

rebecca. what do you think was in it, then? oh, dear, good mrs.
helseth, do tell me!

mrs. helseth. certainly not, miss. not for worlds.

rebecca. oh, you can tell me. you and i are such friends, you know.

mrs. helseth. heaven forbid i should tell you anything about that,
miss. i shall not tell you anything, except that it was some dreadful
idea that they had gone and put into my poor sick mistress's head.

rebecca. who had put it into her head?

mrs. helseth. wicked people, miss. wicked people.

rebecca. wicked--?

mrs. helseth. yes, i say it again--very wicked people, they must have
been.

rebecca. and what do you think it could be?

mrs. helseth. oh, i know what i think--but, please heaven, i'll keep my
mouth shut. at the same time, there is a certain lady in the town--hm!

rebecca. i can see you mean mrs. kroll.

mrs. helseth. yes, she is a queer one, she is. she has always been very
much on the high horse with me. and she has never looked with any
friendly eye on you, either, miss.

rebecca. do you think mrs. rosmer was quite in her right mind when she
wrote that letter to mortensgaard?

mrs. helseth. it is so difficult to tell, miss. i certainly don't think
she was quite out of her mind.

rebecca. but you know she seemed to go quite distracted when she learnt
that she would never be able to have a child. that was when her madness
first showed itself.

mrs. helseth. yes, that had a terrible effect on her, poor lady.

rebecca (taking up her work, and sitting down on a chair by the
window). but, in other respects, do you not think that was really a
good thing for mr. rosmer, mrs. helseth?

mrs. helseth. what, miss?

rebecca. that there were no children?

mrs. helseth. hm!--i really do not know what to say to that.

rebecca. believe me, it was best for him. mr. rosmer was never meant to
be surrounded by crying children.

mrs. helseth. little children do not cry at rosmersholm, miss west.

rebecca (looking at her). not cry?

mrs. helseth. no. in this house, little children have never been known
to cry, as long as any one can remember.

rebecca. that is very strange.

mrs. helseth. yes, isn't it, miss? but it runs in the family. and there
is another thing that is just as strange; when they grow up they never
laugh--never laugh, all their lives.

rebecca. but that would be extraordinary

mrs. helseth. have you ever once heard or seen mr. rosmer laugh, miss?

rebecca. no--now that i think of it, i almost believe you are right.
but i fancy most of the folk hereabouts laugh very little.

mrs. helseth. that is quite true. people say it began at rosmersholm,
and i expect it spread like a sort of infection.

rebecca. you are a sagacious woman, mrs. helseth!

mrs. helseth. oh, you mustn't sit there and make game of me, miss.
(listens.) hush, hush--mr. rosmer is coming down. he doesn't like to
see brooms about. (goes out by the door on the right. rosmer, with his
stick and hat in his hand, comes in from the lobby.)

rosmer. good-morning, rebecca.

rebecca. good-morning, dear. (she goes on working for a little while in
silence.) are you going out?

rosmer. yes.

rebecca. it is such a lovely day.

rosmer. you did not come up to see me this morning.

rebecca. no--i didn't. not to-day.

rosmer. don't you mean to do so in future, either? rebecca. i cannot
say yet, dear.

rosmer. has anything come for me?

rebecca. the "county news" has come.

rosmer. the "county news"!

rebecca. there it is, on the table.

rosmer (putting down his hat and stick). is there anything--?

rebecca. yes.

rosmer. and you did not send it up to me

rebecca. you will read it quite soon enough.

rosmer. well, let us see. (takes up the paper and stands by the table
reading it.) what!--"cannot pronounce too emphatic a warning against
unprincipled deserters." (looks at her.) they call me a deserter,
rebecca.

rebecca. they mention no names at all.

rosmer. it comes to the same thing. (goes on reading.) "secret traitors
to the good cause."--"judas-like creatures, who shamelessly confess
their apostasy as soon as they think the most opportune and most
profitable moment has arrived."--"a reckless outrage on the fair fame
of honoured ancestors"--"in the expectation that those who are enjoying
a brief spell of authority will not disappoint them of a suitable
reward." (lays the paper down on the table.) and they write that of
me--these men who have known me so long and so intimately--write a
thing that they do not even believe themselves! they know there is not
a single word of truth in it--and yet they write it.

rebecca. there is more of it yet.

rosmer (taking up the paper again). "make some allowance for
inexperience and want of judgment"--"a pernicious influence which, very
possibly, has extended even to matters which for the present we will
refrain from publicly discussing or condemning." (looks at her.) what
does that mean?

rebecca. that is a hit at me, obviously.

rosmer (laying down the paper). rebecca, this is the conduct of
dishonourable men.

rebecca. yes, it seems to me they have no right to talk about
mortensgaard.

rosmer (walking up and down the room). they must be saved from this
sort of thing. all the good that is in men is destroyed, if it is
allowed to go on. but it shall not be so! how happy--how happy i should
feel if i could succeed in bringing a little light into all this murky
ugliness.

rebecca (getting up). i am sure of it. there is something great,
something splendid, for you to live for!

rosmer. just think of it--if i could wake them to a real knowledge of
themselves--bring them to be angry with and ashamed of
themselves--induce them to be at one with each other in toleration, in
love, rebecca!

rebecca. yes! give yourself up entirely to that task, and you will see
that you will succeed.

rosmer. i think it might be done. what happiness it would be to live
one's life, then! no more hateful strife--only emulation; every eye
fixed on the same goal; every man's will, every man's thoughts moving
forward-upward--each in its own inevitable path happiness for all--and
through the efforts of all! (looks out of the window as he speaks, then
gives a start and says gloomily:) ah! not through me.

rebecca. not--not through you?

rosmer. nor for me, either.

rebecca. oh, john, have no such doubts.

rosmer. happiness, dear rebecca, means first and foremost the calm,
joyous sense of innocence.

rebecca (staring in front of her). ah, innocence--

rosmer. you need fear nothing on that score. but i--

rebecca. you least of all men!

rosmer (pointing out of the window). the mill-race.

rebecca. oh, john!--(mrs. helseth looks in in through the door on the
left.)

mrs. helseth. miss west!

rebecca. presently, presently. not now.

mrs. helseth. just a word, miss! (rebecca goes to the door. mrs.
helseth tells her something, and they whisper together for a moment;
then mrs. helseth nods and goes away.)

rosmer (uneasily). was it anything for me?

rebecca. no, only something about the housekeeping. you ought to go out
into the open air now, john dear. you should go for a good long walk.

rosmer (taking up his hat). yes, come along; we will go together.

rebecca. no, dear, i can't just now. you must go by yourself. but shake
off all these gloomy thoughts--promise me that!

rosmer. i shall never be able to shake them quite off, i am afraid.

rebecca. oh, but how can you let such groundless fancies take such a
hold on you!

rosmer. unfortunately they are not so groundless as you think, dear. i
have lain, thinking them over, all night. perhaps beata saw things
truly after all.

rebecca. in what way do you mean?

rosmer. saw things truly when she believed i loved you, rebecca.

rebecca. truly in that respect?

rosmer (laying his hat down on the table). this is the question i have
been wrestling with--whether we two have deluded ourselves the whole
time, when we have been calling the tie between us merely friendship.

rebecca. do you mean, then, that the right name for it would have
been--?

rosmer. love. yes, dear, that is what i mean. even while beata was
alive, it was you that i gave all my thoughts to. it was you alone i
yearned for. it was with you that i experienced peaceful, joyful,
passionless happiness. when we consider it rightly, rebecca, our life
together began like the sweet, mysterious love of two children for one
another--free from desire or any thought of anything more. did you not
feel it in that way too? tell me.

rebecca (struggling with herself). oh, i do not know what to answer.

rosmer. and it was this life of intimacy, with one another and for one
another, that we took to be friendship. no, dear--the tie between us
has been a spiritual marriage--perhaps from the very first day. that is
why i am guilty. i had no right to it--no right to it for beata's sake.

rebecca. no right to a happy life? do you believe that, john?

rosmer. she looked at the relations between us through the eyes of her
love--judged them after the nature of her love. and it was only
natural. she could not have judged them otherwise than she did.

rebecca. but how can you so accuse yourself for beata's delusions?

rosmer. it was for love of me--in her own way that--she threw herself
into the mill-race. that fact is certain, rebecca. i can never get
beyond that.

rebecca. oh, do not think of anything else but the great, splendid task
that you are going to devote your life to!

rosmer (shaking his head). it can never be carried through. not by me.
not after what i know now.

rebecca. why not by you?

rosmer. because no cause can ever triumph which has its beginnings in
guilt.

rebecca (impetuously). oh, these are nothing but prejudices you have
inherited--these doubts, these fears, these scruples! you have a legend
here that your dead return to haunt you in the form of white horses.
this seems to me to be something of that sort.

rosmer. be that as it may, what difference does it make if i cannot
shake it off? believe me, rebecca, it is as i say--any cause which is
to win a lasting victory must be championed by a man who is joyous and
innocent.

rebecca. but is joy so absolutely indispensable to you, john?

rosmer. joy? yes, indeed it is.

rebecca. to you, who never laugh?

rosmer. yes, in spite of that. believe me, i have a great capacity for
joy.

rebecca. now you really must go out, dear--for a long walk--a really
long one, do you hear? there is your hat, and there is your stick.

rosmer (taking them from her). thank you. and you won't come too?

rebecca. no, no, i can't come now.

rosmer. very well. you are none the less always with me now. (goes out
by the entrance hall. after a moment rebecca peeps out from behind the
door which he has left open. then she goes to the door on the right,
which she opens.)

rebecca (in a whisper). now, mrs. helseth. you can let him come in now.
(crosses to the window. a moment later, kroll comes in from the right.
he bows to her silently and formally and keeps his hat in his hand.)

kroll. has he gone, then?

rebecca. yes.

kroll. does he generally stay out long?

rebecca. yes. but to-day he is in a very uncertain mood--so, if you do
not want to meet him--

kroll. certainly not. it is you i wish to speak to--and quite alone.

rebecca. then we had better make the best of our time. please sit down.
(she sits down in an easy-chair by the window. kroll takes a chair
beside her.)

kroll. miss west, you can scarcely have any idea how deeply pained and
unhappy i am over this revolution that has taken place in john rosmer's
ideas.

rebecca. we were prepared for that being so--at first.

kroll. only at first?

rosmer. mr. rosmer hoped confidently that sooner or later you would
take your place beside him.

kroll. i?

rebecca. you and all his other friends.

kroll. that should convince you how feeble his judgment is on any
matter concerning his fellow-creatures and the affairs of real life.

rebecca. in any case, now that he feels the absolute necessity of
cutting himself free on all sides--

kroll. yes; but, let me tell you, that is exactly what i do not believe.

rebecca. what do you believe, then?

kroll. i believe it is you that are at the bottom of the whole thing.

rebecca. your wife put that into your head, mr. kroll.

kroll. it does not matter who put it into my head. the point is this,
that i feel grave doubts--exceedingly grave doubts--when i recall and
think over the whole of your behaviour since you came here.

rebecca (looking at him). i have a notion that there was a time when
you had an exceedingly strong belief in me, dear mr. kroll--i might
almost say, a warm belief.

kroll (in a subdued voice). i believe you could bewitch any one--if you
set yourself to do it.

rebecca. and you say i set myself to do it!

kroll. yes, you did. i am no longer such a simpleton as to suppose that
sentiment entered into your little game at all. you simply wanted to
secure yourself admission to rosmersholm--to establish yourself here.
that was what i was to help you to. i see it now.

rebecca. then you have completely forgotten that it was beata that
begged and entreated me to come and live here.

kroll. yes, because you had bewitched her too. are you going to pretend
that friendship is the name for what she came to feel towards you? it
was idolatry--adoration. it degenerated into a--what shall i call,
it?--a sort of desperate passion. yes, that is just the word for it.

rebecca. have the goodness to remember the condition your sister was
in. as far as i am concerned i do not think i can be said to be
particularly emotional in any way.

kroll. no, you certainly are not. but that makes you all the more
dangerous to those whom you wish to get into your power. it comes easy
to you to act with deliberation and careful calculation, just because
you have a cold heart.

rebecca. cold? are you so sure of that?

kroll. i am certain of it now. otherwise you could not have pursued
your object here so unswervingly, year after year. yes, yes--you have
gained what you wanted. you have got him and everything else here into
your power. but, to carry out your schemes, you have not scrupled to
make him unhappy.

rebecca. that is not true. it is not i; it is you yourself that have
made him unhappy.

kroll. i!

rebecca. yes, by leading him to imagine that he was responsible for the
terrible end that overtook beata.

kroll. did that affect him so deeply, then?

rebecca. of course. a man of such gentle disposition as he--

kroll. i imagined that one of your so-called "emancipated" men would
know how to overcome any scruples. but there it is! oh, yes--as a
matter of fact it turned out just as i expected. the descendant of the
men who are looking at us from these walls need not think he can break
loose from what has been handed down as an inviolable inheritance from
generation to generation.

rebecca (looking thoughtfully in front of her). john rosmer's nature is
deeply rooted in his ancestors. that is certainly very true.

kroll. yes, and you ought to have taken that into consideration, if you
had had any sympathy for him. but i dare say you were incapable of that
sort of consideration. your starting-point is so very widely-removed
from his, you see.

rebecca. what do you mean by my starting-point?

kroll. i mean the starting-point of origin--of parentage, miss west.

rebecca. i see. yes, it is quite true that my origin is very humble.
but nevertheless--

kroll. i am not alluding to rank or position. i am thinking of the
moral aspect of your origin.

rebecca. of my origin? in what respect?

kroll. in respect of your birth generally.

rebecca. what are you saying!

kroll. i am only saying it because it explains the whole of your
conduct.

rebecca. i do not understand. be so good as to tell me exactly what you
mean.

kroll. i really thought you did not need telling. otherwise it would
seem a very strange thing that you let yourself be adopted by dr. west.

rebecca (getting up). oh, that is it! now i understand.

kroll. and took his name. your mother's name was gamvik.

rebecca (crossing the room). my father's name was gamvik, mr. kroll.

kroll. your mother's occupation must, of course, have brought her
continually into contact with the district physician.

rebecca. you are quite right.

kroll. and then he takes you to live with him, immediately upon your
mother's death. he treats you harshly, and yet you stay with him. you
know that he will not leave you a single penny--as a matter of fact you
only got a box of books--and yet you endure living with him, put up
with his behaviour, and nurse him to the end.

rebecca (comes to the table and looks at him scornfully). and my doing
all that makes it clear to you that there was something
immoral--something criminal about my birth!

kroll. what you did for him, i attributed to an unconscious filial
instinct. and, as far as the rest of it goes, i consider that the whole
of your conduct has been the outcome of your origin.

rebecca (hotly). but there is not a single word of truth in what you
say! and i can prove it! dr. west had not come to finmark when i was
born.

kroll. excuse me, miss west. he went there a year before you were born.
i have ascertained that.

rebecca. you are mistaken, i tell you! you are absolutely mistaken!

kroll. you said here, the day before yesterday, that you were
twenty-nine--going on for thirty.

rebecca. really? did i say that?

kroll. yes, you did. and from that i can calculate--

rebecca. stop! that will not help you to calculate. for, i may as well
tell you at once, i am a year older than i give myself out to be.

kroll (smiling incredulously). really? that is something new. how is
that?

rebecca. when i had passed my twenty-fifth birthday, i thought i was
getting altogether too old for an unmarried girl, so i resolved to tell
a lie and take a year off my age.

kroll. you--an emancipated woman--cherishing prejudices as to the
marriageable age!

rebecca. i know it was a silly thing to do--and ridiculous, too. but
every one has some prejudice or another that they cannot get quite rid
of. we are like that.

kroll. maybe. but my calculation may be quite correct, all the same;
because dr. west was up in finmark for a flying visit the year before
he was appointed.

rebecca (impetuously). that is not true

kroll. isn't it?

rebecca. no. my mother never mentioned it.

kroll. didn't she, really!

rebecca. no, never. nor dr. west, either. never a word of it.

kroll. might that not be because they both had good reason to jump over
a year?--@just as you have done yourself, miss west? perhaps it is a
family failing.

rebecca (walking about, wringing her hands). it is impossible. it is
only something you want to make me believe. nothing in the world will
make me believe it. it cannot be true! nothing in the world--

kroll (getting up). but, my dear miss west, why in heaven's name do you
take it in this way? you quite alarm me! what am i to believe and think?

rebecca. nothing. neither believe nor think anything.

kroll. then you really must give me some explanation of your taking
this matter--this possibility--so much to heart.

rebecca (controlling herself). it is quite obvious, i should think, mr.
kroll. i have no desire for people here to think me an illegitimate
child.

kroll. quite so. well, well, let us be content with your explanation,
for the present. but you see that is another point on which you have
cherished a certain prejudice.

rebecca. yes, that is quite true.

kroll. and it seems to me that very much the same applies to most of
this "emancipation" of yours, as you call it. your reading has
introduced you to a hotch-potch of new ideas and opinions; you have
made a certain acquaintance with researches that are going on in
various directions--researches that seem to you to upset a good many
ideas that people have hitherto considered incontrovertible and
unassailable. but all this has never gone any further than knowledge in
your case, miss west--a mere matter of the intellect. it has not got
into your blood.

rebecca (thoughtfully). perhaps you are right.

kroll. yes, only test yourself, and you will see! and if it is true in
your case, it is easy to recognise how true it must be in john
rosmer's. of course it is madness, pure and simple. he will be running
headlong to his ruin if he persists in coming openly forward and
proclaiming himself an apostate! just think of it--he, with his shy
disposition! think of him disowned--hounded out of the circle to which
he has always belonged--exposed to the uncompromising attacks of all
the best people in the place. nothing would ever make him the man to
endure that.

rebecca. he must endure it! it is too late now for him to draw back.

kroll. not a bit too late--not by any means too late. what has happened
can be hushed up--or at any rate can be explained away as a purely
temporary, though regrettable, aberration. but--there is one step that
it is absolutely essential he should take.

rebecca. and that is?

kroll. you must get him to legalise his position, miss west.

rebecca. the position in which he stands to me?

kroll. yes. you must see that you get him to do that.

rebecca. then you can't rid yourself of the conviction that the
relations between us need "legalising," as you say?

kroll. i do not wish to go any more precisely into the question. but i
certainly have observed that the conditions under which it always seems
easiest for people to abandon all their so-called prejudices are
when--ahem!

rebecca. when it is a question of the relations between a man and a
woman, i suppose you mean?

kroll. yes--to speak candidly--that is what i mean.

rebecca (walks across the room and looks out of the window). i was on
the point of saying that i wish you had been right, mr. kroll.

kroll. what do you mean by that? you say it so strangely!

rebecca. oh, nothing! do not let us talk any more about it. ah, there
he is!

kroll. already! i will go, then.

rebecca (turning to him). no--stay here, and you will hear something.

kroll. not now. i do not think i could bear to see him.

rebecca. i beg you to stay. please do, or you will regret it later. it
is the last time i shall ever ask you to do anything.

kroll (looks at her in surprise, and lays his hat down). very well,
miss west. it shall be as you wish. (a short pause. then rosmer comes
in from the hall.)

rosmer (stops at the door, as he sees kroll). what! you here?

rebecca. he wanted to avoid meeting you, john.

kroll (involuntarily). "john?"

rebecca. yes, mr. kroll. john and i call each other by our christian
names. that is a natural consequence of the relations between us.

kroll. was that what i was to hear if i stayed?

rebecca. yes, that and something else.

rosmer (coming into the room). what is the object of your visit here
to-day?

kroll. i wanted to make one more effort to stop you, and win you back.

rosmer (pointing to the newspaper). after that?

kroll. i did not write it.

rosmer. did you take any steps to prevent its appearing?

kroll. that would have been acting unjustifiably towards the cause i
serve. and, besides that, i had no power to prevent it.

rebecca (tears the newspaper into pieces, which she crumples up and
throws into the back of the stove). there! now it is out of sight; let
it be out of mind too. because there will be no more of that sort of
thing, john.

kroll. indeed, i wish you could ensure that.

rebecca. come, and let us sit down, dear--all three of us. then i will
tell you all about it.

rosmer (sitting down involuntarily). what has come over you, rebecca?
you are so unnaturally calm--what is it?

rebecca. the calmness of determination. (sits down.) please sit down
too, mr. kroll. (he takes a seat on the couch.)

rosmer. determination, you say. determination to do what?

rebecca. i want to give you back what you need in order to live your
life. you shall have your happy innocence back, dear friend.

rosmer. but what do you mean?

rebecca. i will just tell you what happened. that is all that is
necessary.

rosmer. well?

rebecca. when i came down here from finmark with dr. west, it seemed to
me that a new, great, wide world was opened to me. dr. west had given
me an erratic sort of education--had taught me all the odds and ends
that i knew about life then. (has an evident struggle with herself, and
speaks in barely audible tones.) and then--

kroll. and then?

rosmer. but, rebecca--i know all this.

rebecca (collecting herself). yes--that is true enough. you know it
only too well.

kroll (looking fixedly at her). perhaps it would be better if i left
you.

rebecca. no, stay where you are, dear mr. kroll. (to rosmer.) well,
this was how it was. i wanted to play my part in the new day that was
dawning--to have a share in all the new ideas. mr. kroll told me one
day that ulrik brendel had had a great influence over you once, when
you were a boy. i thought it might be possible for me to resume that
influence here.

rosmer. did you come here with a covert design?

rebecca. what i wanted was that we two should go forward together on
the road towards freedom--always forward, and further forward! but
there was that gloomy, insurmountable barrier between you and a full,
complete emancipation.

rosmer. what barrier do you mean?

rebecca. i mean, john, that you could never have attained freedom
except in the full glory of the sunshine. and, instead of that, here
you were--ailing and languishing in the gloom of such a marriage as
yours.

rosmer. you have never spoken to me of my marriage in that way, before
to-day.

rebecca. no, i did not dare, for fear of frightening you.

kroll (nodding to rosmer). you hear that!

rebecca (resuming). but i saw quite well where your salvation lay--your
only salvation. and so i acted.

rosmer. how do you mean--you acted?

kroll. do you mean that?

rebecca. yes, john. (gets up.) no, do not get up. nor you either, mr.
kroll. but we must let in the daylight now. it was not you, john. you
are innocent. it was i that lured--that ended by luring--beata into the
tortuous path--

rosmer (springing up). rebecca!

kroll (getting up). into the tortuous path!

rebecca. into the path that--led to the mill-race. now you know it,
both of you.

rosmer (as if stunned). but i do not understand--what is she standing
there saying? i do not understand a word--

kroll. yes, yes. i begin to understand.

rosmer. but what did you do? what did you find to tell her? because
there was nothing--absolutely nothing!

rebecca. she got to know that you were determined to emancipate
yourself from all your old prejudices.

rosmer. yes, but at that time i had come to no decision.

rebecca. i knew that you soon would come to one.

kroll (nodding to rosmer). aha!

rosmer. well--and what more? i want to know everything now.

rebecca. some time afterwards, i begged and implored her to let me
leave rosmersholm.

rosmer. why did you want to leave here--then?

rebecca. i did not want to. i wanted to remain where i was. but i told
her that it would be best for us all if i went away in time. i let her
infer that if i remained here any longer i could not tell
what-what-might happen.

rosmer. that is what you said and did, then?

rebecca. yes, john.

rosmer. that is what you referred to when you said that you "acted"?

rebecca (in a broken voice). yes, that was it.

rosmer (after a pause). have you confessed everything now, rebecca?

rebecca. yes.

kroll. not everything.

rebecca (looking at him in terror). what else can there be?

kroll. did you not eventually lead beata to believe that it was
necessary--not merely that it should be best--but that it was
necessary, both for your own sake and for john's, that you should go
away somewhere else as soon as possible?--well?

rebecca (speaking low and indistinctly). perhaps i did say something of
the sort.

rosmer (sinking into a chair by the window). and she, poor sick
creature, believed in this tissue of lies and deceit! believed in it so
completely--so absolutely! (looks up at rebecca.) and she never came to
me about it--never said a word! ah, rebecca--i see it in your face--you
dissuaded her from doing so.

rebecca. you know she had taken it into her head that she, a childless
wife, had no right to be here. and so she persuaded herself that her
duty to you was to give place to another.

rosmer. and you--you did nothing to rid her mind of such an idea?

rebecca. no.

kroll. perhaps you encouraged her in the idea? answer! did you not do
so?

rebecca. that was how she understood me, i believe.

rosmer. yes, yes--and she bowed to your will in everything. and so she
gave place. (springs up.) how could you--how could you go on with this
terrible tragedy!

rebecca. i thought there were two lives here to choose between, john.

kroll (severely and with authority). you had no right to make any such
choice.

rebecca (impetuously). surely you do not think i acted with cold and
calculating composure! i am a different woman now, when i am telling
you this, from what i was then. and i believe two different kinds of
will can exist at the same time in one person. i wanted beata away--in
one way or the other; but i never thought it would happen, all the
same. at every step i ventured and risked, i seemed to hear a voice in
me crying: "no further! not a step further!" and yet, at the same time,
i could not stop. i had to venture a little bit further--just one step.
and then another--and always another--and at last it happened. that is
how such things go of themselves. (a short silence.)

rosmer (to rebecca). and how do you think it will go with you in the
future?--after this?

rebecca. things must go with me as they can. it is of very little
consequence.

kroll. not a word suggestive of remorse! perhaps you feel none?

rebecca (dismissing his remark coldly). excuse me, mr. kroll, that is a
matter that is no concern of any one else's. that is an account i must
settle with myself.

kroll (to rosmer). and this is the woman you have been living under the
same roof with--in relations of the completest confidence. (looks up at
the portraits on the walls.) if only those that are gone could look
down now!

rosmer. are you going into the town?

kroll (taking up his hat). yes. the sooner the better.

rosmer (taking his hat also). then i will go with you.

kroll. you will! ah, i thought we had not quite lost you.

rosmer. come, then, kroll. come! (they both go out into the hall
without looking at rebecca. after a minute rebecca goes cautiously to
the window and peeps out between the flowers.)

rebecca (speaking to herself, half aloud). not over the bridge to-day
either. he is going round. never over the millrace--never. (comes away
from the window.) as i thought! (she goes over to the bell, and rings
it. soon afterwards mrs. helseth comes in from the right.)

mrs. helseth. what is it, miss?

rebecca. mrs. helseth, will you be so good as to fetch my travelling
trunk down from the loft?

mrs. helseth. your trunk?

rebecca. yes, the brown hair-trunk, you know.

mrs. helseth. certainly, miss. but, bless my soul, are you going away
on a journey, miss?

rebecca. yes--i am going away on a journey, mrs. helseth.

mrs. helseth. and immediately!

rebecca. as soon as i have packed.

mrs. helseth. i never heard of such a thing! but you are coming back
again soon, i suppose, miss?

rebecca. i am never coming back again.

mrs. helseth. never! but, my goodness, what is to become of us at
rosmersholm if miss west is not here any longer? just as everything was
making poor mr. rosmer so happy and comfortable!

rebecca. yes, but to-day i have had a fright, mrs. helseth.

mrs. helseth. a fright! good heavens-how?

rebecca. i fancy i have had a glimpse of the white horse.

mrs. helseth. of the white horse! in broad daylight!

rebecca. ah! they are out both early and late, the white horses of
rosmersholm. (crosses the room.) well--we were speaking of my trunk,
mrs. helseth.

mrs. helseth. yes, miss. your trunk.

(they both go out to the right.)




act iv


(scene.--the same room in the late evening. the lamp, with a shade on
it, is burning on the table. rebecca is standing by the table, packing
some small articles in a travelling-bag. her cloak, hat, and the white
crochetted shawl are hanging on the back of the couch. mrs. helseth
comes in from the right.)

mrs. helseth (speaking in low tones and with a reserved manner). yes,
all your things have been taken down, miss. they are in the kitchen
passage.

rebecca. thank you. you have ordered the carriage?

mrs. helseth. yes, miss. the coachman wants to know what time he shall
bring it round.

rebecca. i think at about eleven o'clock. the boat goes at midnight.

mrs. helseth (with a little hesitation). but what about mr. rosmer?
suppose he is not back by that time?

rebecca. i shall start, all the same. if i should not see him, you can
tell him i will write to him--a long letter, say that.

mrs. helseth. yes, i dare say it will be all right to write. but, poor
dear, i really think that you ought to try and have a talk with him
once more.

rebecca. perhaps i ought--or perhaps not, after all.

mrs. helseth. dear, dear! i never thought i should, live to see such a
thing as this!

rebecca. what did you think, then, mrs. helseth?

mrs. helseth. to tell the truth, miss, i thought mr. rosmer was an
honester man than that.

rebecca. honester?

mrs. helseth. yes, miss, that is the truth.

rebecca. but, my dear mrs. helseth, what do you mean by that?

mrs. helseth. i mean what is true and right, miss. he should not get
out of it in this way--that he shouldn't.

rebecca (looking at her). now look here, mrs. helseth. tell me,
honestly and frankly, why you think i am going away.

mrs. helseth. good lord, miss--because it is necessary, i suppose.
well, well!--still, i certainly do not think mr. rosmer has behaved
well. there was some excuse in mortensgaard's case, because the woman's
husband was still alive; so that it was impossible for them to marry,
however much they wished it. but mr. rosmer, he could--ahem!

rebecca (with a faint smile). is it possible that you could think such
things about me and mr. rosmer?

mrs. helseth. not for a moment--until to-day, i mean.

rebecca. but why to-day?

mrs. helseth. well, after all the horrible things they tell me one may
see in the papers about mr. rosmer--

rebecca. ah!

mrs. helseth. what i mean is this--if a man can go over to
mortensgaard's religion, you may believe him capable of anything. and
that's the truth.

rebecca. yes, very likely. but about me? what have you got to say about
me?

mrs. helseth. well, i am sure, miss--i do not think you are so greatly
to be blamed. it is not always so easy for a lone woman to resist, i
dare say. we are all human after all, miss west.

rebecca. that is very true, mrs. helseth. we are all human, after
all.--what are you listening to?

mrs. helseth (in a low voice). good lord!--i believe that is him coming
now.

rebecca (with a start). in spite of everything, then--! (speaks with
determination.) very well. so be it. (rosmer comes in from the hall. he
sees the luggage, and turns to rebecca.)

rosmer. what does this mean?

rebecca. i am going away.

rosmer. at once?

rebecca. yes. (to mrs. helseth.) eleven o'clock, then.

mrs. helseth. very well, miss. (goes out to the right.)

rosmer (after a short pause). where are you going, rebecca?

rebecca. i am taking the boat for the north.

rosmer. north? what are you going there for?

rebecca. it is where i came from.

rosmer. but you have no more ties there now.

rebecca. i have none here, either.

rosmer. what do you propose to do?

rebecca. i do not know. i only want to make an end of it.

rosmer. make an end of what?

rebecca. rosmersholm has broken me.

rosmer (more attentively). what is that?

rebecca. broken me utterly. i had a will of my own, and some courage,
when i came here. now i am crushed under the law of strangers. i do not
think i shall have the courage to begin anything else in the world
after this.

rosmer. why not? what do you mean by being crushed under a law--?

rebecca. dear friend, do not let us talk about that now--tell me what
passed between you and mr. kroll.

rosmer. we have made our peace.

rebecca. quite so. so it came to that.

rosmer. he got together all our old circle of friends at his house.
they convinced me that the work of ennobling men's souls was not in my
line at all. besides, it is such a hopeless task, any way. i shall let
it alone.

rebecca. well, perhaps it is better so.

rosmer. do you say that now? is that what your opinion is now?

rebecca. i have come to that opinion--in the last day or two.

rosmer. you are lying, rebecca.

rebecca. lying--?

rosmer. yes, lying. you have never believed in me. you have never
believed me to be the man to lead the cause to victory.

rebecca. i have believed that we two together would be equal to it.

rosmer. that is not true. you have believed that you could accomplish
something big in life yourself--that you could use me to further your
plans--that i might be useful to you in the pursuit of your object.
that is what you have believed.

rebecca. listen to me, john

rosmer (sitting down wearily on the couch). oh, let me be! i see the
whole thing clearly now. i have been like a glove in your hands.

rebecca. listen to me, john. let us talk this thing over. it will be
for the last time. (sits down in a chair by the couch.) i had intended
to write to you about it all--when i had gone back north. but it is
much better that you should hear it at once.

rosmer. have you something more to tell, then?

rebecca. the most important part of it all.

rosmer. what do you mean?

rebecca. something that you have never suspected. something that puts
all the rest in its true light.

rosmer (shaking his head). i do not understand, at all.

rebecca. it is quite true that at one time i did play my cards so as to
secure admission to rosmersholm. my idea was that i should succeed in
doing well for myself here--either in one way or in another, you
understand.

rosmer. well, you succeeded in carrying your scheme through, too.

rebecca. i believe i could have carried anything through--at that time.
for then i still had the courage of a free will. i had no one else to
consider, nothing to turn me from my path. but then began what has
broken down my will and filled the whole of my life with dread and
wretchedness.

rosmer. what--began? speak so that i can understand you.

rebecca. there came over me--a wild, uncontrollable passion--oh, john--!

rosmer. passion? you--! for what?

rebecca. for you.

rosmer (getting up). what does this mean!

rebecca (preventing him). sit still, dear. i will tell you more about
it.

rosmer. and you mean to say--that you have loved me--in that way!

rebecca. i thought i might call it loving you--then. i thought it was
love. but it was not. it was what i have said--a wild, uncontrollable
passion.

rosmer (speaking with difficulty). rebecca--is it really you--you--who
are sitting here telling me this?

rebecca. yes, indeed it is, john.

rosmer. then it was as the outcome of this--and under the influence of
this--that you "acted," as you called it.

rebecca. it swept over me like a storm over the sea--like one of the
storms we have in winter in the north. they catch you up and rush you
along with them, you know, until their fury is expended. there is no
withstanding them.

rosmer. so it swept poor unhappy beata into the mill-race.

rebecca. yes--it was like a fight for life between beata and me at that
time.

rosmer. you proved the strongest of us all at rosmersholm--stronger
than both beata and me put together.

rebecca. i knew you well enough to know that i could not get at you in
any way until you were set free--both in actual circumstances and in
your soul.

rosmer. but i do not understand you, rebecca. you--you yourself and
your whole conduct--are an insoluble riddle to me. i am free now--both
in my soul and my circumstances. you are absolutely in touch with the
goal you set before yourself from the beginning. and nevertheless--

rebecca. i have never stood farther from my goal than i do now.

rosmer. and nevertheless, i say, when yesterday i asked you--urged
you--to become my wife, you cried out that it never could be.

rebecca. i cried out in despair, john.

rosmer. why?

rebecca. because rosmersholm has unnerved me. all the courage has been
sapped out of my will here--crushed out! the time has gone for me to
dare risk anything whatever. i have lost all power of action, john.

rosmer. tell me how that has come about.

rebecca. it has come about through my living with you.

rosmer. but how? how?

rebecca. when i was alone with you here--and you had really found
yourself--

rosmer. yes, yes?

rebecca. for you never really found yourself as long as beata was
alive--

rosmer. alas, you are right in that.

rebecca. when it came about that i was living together with you here,
in peace and solitude--when you exchanged all your thoughts with me
unreservedly--your every mood, however tender or intimate--then the
great change happened in me. little by little, you understand. almost
imperceptibly--but overwhelmingly in the end, till it reached the
uttermost depths of my soul.

rosmer. what does this mean, rebecca?

rebecca. all the other feeling--all that horrible passion that had
drowned my better self--left me entirely. all the violent emotions that
had been roused in me were quelled and silenced. a peace stole over my
soul--a quiet like that of one of our mountain peaks up under the
midnight sun.

rosmer. tell me more of it--all that you can.

rebecca. there is not much more to tell. only that this was how love
grew up in my heart--a great, self-denying love--content with such a
union of hearts as there has been between us two.

rosmer. oh, if only i had had the slightest suspicion of all this!

rebecca. it is best as it is. yesterday, when you asked me if i would
be your wife, i gave a cry of joy--

rosmer. yes, it was that, rebecca, was it not! i thought that was what
it meant.

rebecca. for a moment, yes-i forgot myself for a moment. it was my
dauntless will of the old days that was struggling to be free again.
but now it has no more strength--it has lost it for ever.

rosmer. how do you explain what has taken place in you?

rebecca. it is the rosmer attitude towards life-or your attitude
towards life, at any rate--that has infected my will.

rosmer. infected?

rebecca. yes, and made it sickly--bound it captive under laws that
formerly had no meaning for me. you--my life together with you--have
ennobled my soul--

rosmer. ah, if i dared believe that to be true!

rebecca. you may believe it confidently. the rosmer attitude towards
life ennobles. but-(shakes her head)-but-but--

rosmer. but? well?

rebecca. but it kills joy, you know.

rosmer. do you say that, rebecca?

rebecca. for me, at all events.

rosmer. yes, but are you so sure of that? if i asked you again now--?
implored you--?

rebecca. oh, my dear--never go back to that again! it is impossible.
yes, impossible--because i must tell you this, john. i have a--past
behind me.

rosmer. something more than you have told me?

rebecca. yes, something more and something different.

rosmer (with a faint smile). it is very strange, rebecca, but--do you
know--the idea of such a thing has occurred to me more than once.

rebecca. it has? and yet--notwithstanding that, you--?

rosmer. i never believed in it. i only played with the idea-nothing
more.

rebecca. if you wish, i will tell you all about it at once.

rosmer (stopping her). no, no! i do not want to hear a word about it.
whatever it is, it shall be forgotten, as far as i am concerned.

rebecca. but i cannot forget it.

rosmer. oh, rebecca--!

rebecca. yes, dear--that is just the dreadful part of it-that now, when
all the happiness of life is freely and fully offered to me, all i can
feel is that i am barred out from it by my past.

rosmer. your past is dead, rebecca. it has no longer any hold on
you--has nothing to do with you--as you are now.

rebecca. ah, my dear, those are mere words, you know. what about
innocence, then? where am i to get that from?

rosmer (gloomily). ah, yes--innocence.

rebecca. yes, innocence--which is at the root of all joy and happiness.
that was the teaching, you know, that you wanted to see realised by all
the men you were going to raise up to nobility and happiness.

rosmer. ah, do not remind me of that. it was nothing but a half-dreamt
dream, rebecca--a rash suggestion that i have no longer any faith in.
human nature cannot be ennobled by outside influences, believe me.

rebecca (gently). not by a tranquil love, do you think?

rosmer (thoughtfully). yes, that would be a splendid thing--almost the
most glorious thing in life, i think if it were so. (moves restlessly.)
but how am i ever to clear up the question?--how am i to get to the
bottom of it?

rebecca. do you not believe in me, john?

rosmer. ah, rebecca, how can i believe you entirely--you whose life
here has been nothing but continual concealment and secrecy!--and now
you have this new tale to tell. if it is cloaking some design of yours,
tell me so--openly. perhaps there is something or other that you hope
to gain by that means? i will gladly do anything that i can for you.

rebecca (wringing her hands). oh, this killing doubt! john, john--!

rosmer. yes, i know, dear--it is horrible--but i cannot help it. i
shall never be able to free myself from it--never be able to feel
certain that your love for me is genuine and pure.

rebecca. but is there nothing in your own heart that bears witness to
the transformation that has taken place in me--and taken place through
your influence, and yours alone!

rosmer. ah, my dear, i do not believe any longer in my power to
transform people. i have no belief in myself left at all. i do not
believe either in myself or in you.

rebecca (looking darkly at him). how are you going to live out your
life, then?

rosmer. that is just what i do not know--and cannot imagine. i do not
believe i can live it out. and, moreover, i do not know anything in the
world that would be worth living for.

rebecca. life carries a perpetual rebirth with it. let us hold fast to
it, dear. we shall be finished with it quite soon enough.

rosmer (getting up restlessly). then give me my faith back again!--my
faith in you, rebecca--my faith in your love! give me a proof of it! i
must have some proof!

rebecca. proof? how can i give you a proof--!

rosmer. you must! (crosses the room.) i cannot bear this desolate,
horrible loneliness--this-this--. (a knock is heard at the hall door.)

rebecca (getting up from her chair). did you hear that?

(the door opens, and ulrik brendel comes in. except that he wears a
white shirt, a black coat and, a good pair of high boots, he is dressed
as in the first act. he looks troubled.)

rosmer. ah, it is you, mr. brendel!

brendel. john, my boy, i have come to say good-bye to you!

rosmer. where are you going, so late as this?

brendel. downhill.

rosmer. how--?

brendel. i am on my way home, my beloved pupil. i am homesick for the
great nothingness.

rosmer. something has happened to you, mr. brendel! what is it?

brendel. ah, you notice the transformation, then? well, it is evident
enough. the last time i entered your doors i stood before you a man of
substance, slapping a well-filled pocket.

rosmer. really? i don't quite understand--

brendel. and now, as you see me to-night, i am a deposed monarch
standing over the ashes of my burnt-out palace.

rosmer. if there is any way i can help you

brendel. you have preserved your childlike heart, john--can you let me
have a loan?

rosmer. yes, most willingly!

brendel. can you spare me an ideal or two?

rosmer. what do you say?

brendel. one or two cast-off ideals? you will be doing a good deed. i
am cleaned out, my dear boy, absolutely and entirely.

rebecca. did you not succeed in giving your lecture?

brendel. no, fair lady. what do you think?--just as i was standing
ready to pour out the contents of my horn in plenty, i made the painful
discovery that i was bankrupt.

rebecca. but what of all your unwritten works, then?

brendel. for five and twenty years i have been like a miser sitting on
his locked money-chest. and then to-day, when i opened it to take out
my treasure--there was nothing there! the mills of time had ground it
into dust. there was not a blessed thing left of the whole lot.

rosmer. but are you certain of that?

brendel. there is no room for doubt, my dear boy. the president has
convinced me of that.

rosmer. the president?

brendel. oh, well--his excellency, then. ganz nach belieben.

rosmer. but whom do you mean?

brendel. peter mortensgaard, of course.

rosmer. what!

brendel (mysteriously). hush, hush, hush! peter mortensgaard is lord
and chieftain of the future. i have never stood in a more august
presence. peter mortensgaard has the power of omnipotence in him. he
can do whatever he wants.

rosmer. oh, come--don't you believe that!

brendel. it is true, my boy--because peter mortensgaard never wants to
do more than he can. peter mortensgaard is capable of living his life
without ideals. and that, believe me, is precisely the great secret of
success in life. it sums up all the wisdom of the world. basta!

rosmer (in a low voice). now i see that you are going away from here
poorer than you came.

brendel. bien! then take an example from your old tutor. erase from
your mind everything that he imprinted there. do not build your castle
upon the shifting sand. and look well ahead, and be sure of your
ground, before you build upon the charming creature who is sweetening
your life here.

rebecca. do you mean me?

brendel. yes, most attractive mermaid!

rebecca. why am i not fit to build upon?

brendel (taking a step nearer to her). i understood that my former
pupil had a cause which it was his life's work to lead to victory.

rebecca. and if he has--?

brendel. he is certain of victory--but, be it distinctly understood, on
one unalterable condition.

rebecca. what is that?

brendel (taking her gently by the wrist). that the woman who loves him
shall gladly go out into the kitchen and chop off her dainty, pink and
white little finger--here, just at the middle joint. furthermore, that
the aforesaid loving woman shall--also gladly--clip off her
incomparably moulded left ear. (lets her go, and turns to rosmer.)
good-bye, john the victorious!

rosmer. must you go now--in this dark night?

brendel. the dark night is best. peace be with you! (he goes out.
silence in the room for a short time.)

rebecca (breathing heavily). how close and sultry it is in here! (goes
to the window, opens it and stands by it.)

rosmer (sitting down on a chair by the stove). there is nothing else
for it after all, rebecca--i can see that. you must go away.

rebecca. yes, i do not see that i have any choice.

rosmer. let us make use of our last hour together. come over here and
sit beside me.

rebecca (goes and sits down on the couch). what do you want, john?

rosmer. in the first place i want to tell you that you need have no
anxiety about your future.

rebecca (with a smile). hm! my future!

rosmer. i have foreseen all contingencies--long ago. whatever may
happen, you are provided for.

rebecca. have you even done that for me, dear?

rosmer. you might have known that i should.

rebecca. it is many a long day since i thought about anything of the
kind.

rosmer. yes, of course. naturally, you thought things could never be
otherwise between us than as they were.

rebecca. yes, that was what i thought.

rosmer. so did i. but if anything were to happen to me now--

rebecca. oh, john, you will live longer than i shall.

rosmer. i can dispose of my miserable existence as i please, you know.

rebecca. what do you mean? you surely are never thinking of--!

rosmer. do you think it would be so surprising? after the pitiful,
lamentable defeat i have suffered? i, who was to have made it my life's
work to lead my cause to victory--! and here i am, a deserter before
the fight has even really begun!

rebecca. take up the fight again, john! only try--and you will see that
you will conquer. you will ennoble hundreds--thousands--of souls. only
try!

rosmer. i, rebecca, who no longer believe even in my having a mission
in life?

rebecca. but your mission has stood the test. you have at all events
ennobled one of your fellow-creatures for the rest of her life--i mean
myself.

rosmer. yes--if i dared believe you about that.

rebecca (wringing her hands). but, john, do you know of
nothing--nothing--that would make you believe that?

rosmer (starts, as if with fear). don't venture on that subject! no
further, rebecca! not a single word more!

rebecca. indeed, that is just the subject we must venture upon. do you
know of anything that would stifle your doubts? for i know of nothing
in the world.

rosmer. it is best for you not to know. best for us both.

rebecca. no, no, no--i have no patience with that sort of thing! if you
know of anything that would acquit me in your eyes, i claim it as my
right that you should name it.

rosmer (as if impelled against his will). well, let us see. you say
that you have great love in your heart; that your soul has been
ennobled through me. is that so? have you counted the cost? shall we
try and balance our accounts? tell me.

rebecca. i am quite ready.

rosmer. then when shall it be?

rebecca. whenever you like. the sooner the better.

rosmer. then let me see, rebecca, whether you--for my sake-this very
night--. (breaks off.) oh, no, no!

rebecca. yes, john! yes, yes! say it, and you shall see.

rosmer. have you the courage--are you willing--gladly, as ulrik brendel
said--for my sake, to-night--gladly--to go the same way--that beata
went!

rebecca (gets up slowly from the couch, and says almost inaudibly):
john--!

rosmer. yes, dear--that is the question i shall never be able to rid my
thoughts of, when you have gone away. every hour of the day i shall
come back to it. ah, i seem to see you bodily before me--standing out
on the foot-bridge-right out in the middle. now you lean out over the
railing! you grow dizzy as you feel drawn down towards the mill-race!
no--you recoil. you dare not do--what she dared.

rebecca. but if i had the courage?--and willingly and gladly? what then?

rosmer. then i would believe in you. then i should get back my faith in
my mission in life--my faith in my power to ennoble my fellow men--my
faith in mankind's power to be ennobled.

rebecca (takes up her shawl slowly, throws it over her head, and says,
controlling herself): you shall have your faith back.

rosmer. have you the courage and the strength of will for that, rebecca?

rebecca. of that you must judge in the morning--or later--when they
take up my body.

rosmer (burying his head in his hands). there is a horrible temptation
in this--!

rebecca. because i should not like to be left lying there--any longer
than need be. you must take care that they find me.

rosmer (springing up). but all this is madness, you know. go away, or
stay! i will believe you on your bare word this time too.

rebecca. those are mere words, john. no more cowardice or evasion! how
can you believe me on my bare word after today?

rosmer. but i do not want to see your defeat, rebecca.

rebecca. there will be no defeat.

rosmer. there will. you will never have the heart to go beata's way.

rebecca. do you believe that?

rosmer. never. you are not like beata. you are not under the influence
of a distorted view of life.

rebecca. but i am under the influence of the rosmersholm view of
life--now. whatever my offences are--it is right that i should expiate
them.

rosmer (looking at her fixedly). have you come to that decision?

rebecca. yes.

rosmer. very well. then i too am under the influence of our unfettered
view of life, rebecca. there is no one that can judge us. and therefore
we must be our own judges.

rebecca (misunderstanding his meaning). that too. that too. my leaving
you will save the best that is in you.

rosmer. ah, there is nothing left to save in me.

rebecca. there is. but i--after this i should only be like some
sea-sprite hanging on to the barque you are striving to sail forward
in, and, hampering its progress. i must go overboard. do you think i
could go through the world bearing the burden of a spoiled
life--brooding for ever over the happiness which i have forfeited by my
past? i must throw up the game, john.

rosmer. if you go--then i go with you.

rebecca (looks at him with an almost imperceptible smile, and says more
gently): yes, come with me, dear--and be witness--

rosmer. i go with you, i said.

rebecca. as far as the bridge--yes. you never dare go out on to it, you
know.

rosmer. have you noticed that?

rebecca (in sad and broken tones). yes. that was what made my love
hopeless.

rosmer. rebecca--now i lay my hand on your head. (does as he says.) and
i take you for my true and lawful wife.

rebecca (taking both his hands in hers, and bowing her head on to his
breast). thank you, john. (lets him go.) and now i am going--gladly.

rosmer. man and wife should go together.

rebecca. only as far as the bridge, john.

rosmer. and out on to it, too. as far as you go--so far i go with you.
i dare do it now.

rebecca. are you absolutely certain that way is the best for you?

rosmer. i know it is the only way.

rebecca. but suppose you are only deceiving yourself? suppose it were
only a delusion--one of these white horses of rosmersholm?

rosmer. it may be so. we can never escape from them--we of my race.

rebecca. then stay, john!

rosmer. the man shall cleave to his wife, as the wife to her husband.

rebecca. yes, but first tell me this--is it you that go with me, or i
that go with you?

rosmer. we shall never get to the bottom of that.

rebecca. yet i should dearly like to know.

rosmer. we two go with each other, rebecca. i with you, and you with me.

rebecca. i almost believe that is true.

rosmer. for now we two are one.

rebecca. yes. we are one now. come! we can go gladly now. (they go out,
hand in hand, through the hall, and are seen to turn to the left. the
door stands open after them. the room is empty for a little while. then
mrs. helseth opens the door on the right.)

mrs. helseth. the carriage, miss, is--. (looks round the room.) not
here? out together at this time of night? well, well--i must say--! hm!
(goes out into the hall, looks round and comes in again.) not sitting
on the bench--ah, well! (goes to the window and looks out.) good
heavens! what is that white thing--! as i am a living soul, they are
both out on the foot-bridge! god forgive the sinful creatures--if they
are not in each other's arms! (gives a wild scream.) ah!--they are
over--both of them! over into the mill-race! help! help! (her knees
tremble, she holds on shakily to the back of a chair and can scarcely
get her words out.) no. no help here. the dead woman has taken them.


<|EndOfText|>

dramatis personae

  karsten bernick, a shipbuilder.
  mrs. bernick, his wife.
  olaf, their son, thirteen years old.
  martha bernick, karsten bernick's sister.
  johan tonnesen, mrs. bernick's younger brother.
  lona hessel, mrs. bernick's elder half-sister.
  hilmar tonnesen, mrs. bernick's cousin.
  dina dorf, a young girl living with the bernicks.
  rorlund, a schoolmaster.
  rummel, a merchant.
  vigeland and sandstad, tradesman
  krap, bernick's confidential clerk.
  aune, foreman of bernick's shipbuilding yard.
  mrs. rummel.
  hilda rummel, her daughter.
  mrs. holt.
  netta holt, her daughter.
  mrs. lynge.

townsfolk and visitors, foreign sailors, steamboat passengers, etc.,
etc.

(the action takes place at the bernicks' house in one of the smaller
coast towns in norway)




act i.


(scene.--a spacious garden-room in the bernicks' house. in the
foreground on the left is a door leading to bernick's business room;
farther back in the same wall, a similar door. in the middle of the
opposite wall is a large entrance-door, which leads to the street. the
wall in the background is almost wholly composed of plate-glass; a door
in it opens upon a broad flight of steps which lead down to the garden;
a sun-awning is stretched over the steps. below the steps a part of the
garden is visible, bordered by a fence with a small gate in it. on the
other side of the fence runs a street, the opposite side of which is
occupied by small wooden houses painted in bright colours. it is
summer, and the sun is shining warmly. people are seen, every now and
then, passing along the street and stopping to talk to one another;
others going in and out of a shop at the corner, etc.

in the room a gathering of ladies is seated round a table. mrs. bernick
is presiding; on her left side are mrs. holt and her daughter netta,
and next to them mrs. rummel and hilda rummel. on mrs. bernick's right
are mrs. lynge, martha bernick and dina dorf. all the ladies are busy
working. on the table lie great piles of linen garments and other
articles of clothing, some half finished, and some merely cut out.
farther back, at a small table on which two pots of flowers and a glass
of sugared water are standing, rorlund is sitting, reading aloud from a
book with gilt edges, but only loud enough for the spectators to catch
a word now and then. out in the garden olaf bernick is running about
and shooting at a target with a toy crossbow.

after a moment aune comes in quietly through the door on the right.
there is a slight interruption in the reading. mrs. bernick nods to him
and points to the door on the left. aune goes quietly across, knocks
softly at the door of bernick's room, and after a moment's pause,
knocks again. krap comes out of the room, with his hat in his hand and
some papers under his arm.)

krap: oh, it was you knocking?

aune: mr. bernick sent for me.

krap: he did--but he cannot see you. he has deputed me to tell you--

aune: deputed you? all the same, i would much rather--

krap: --deputed me to tell you what he wanted to say to you. you must
give up these saturday lectures of yours to the men.

aune: indeed? i supposed i might use my own time--

krap: you must not use your own time in making the men useless in
working hours. last saturday you were talking to them of the harm that
would be done to the workmen by our new machines and the new working
methods at the yard. what makes you do that?

aune: i do it for the good of the community.

krap: that's curious, because mr. bernick says it is disorganising the
community.

aune: my community is not mr. bernick's, mr. krap! as president of the
industrial association, i must--

krap: you are, first and foremost, president of mr. bernick's
shipbuilding yard; and, before everything else, you have to do your
duty to the community known as the firm of bernick & co.; that is what
every one of us lives for. well, now you know what mr. bernick had to
say to you.

aune: mr. bernick would not have put it that way, mr. krap! but i know
well enough whom i have to thank for this. it is that damned american
boat. those fellows expect to get work done here the way they are
accustomed to it over there, and that--

krap: yes, yes, but i can't go into all these details. you know now
what mr. bernick means, and that is sufficient. be so good as to go
back to the yard; probably you are needed there. i shall be down myself
in a little while. --excuse me, ladies! (bows to the ladies and goes
out through the garden and down the street. aune goes quietly out to
the right. rorlund, who has continued his reading during the foregoing
conversation, which has been carried on in low tones, has now come to
the end of the book, and shuts it with a bang.)

rorlund: there, my dear ladies, that is the end of it.

mrs. rummel: what an instructive tale!

mrs. holt: and such a good moral!

mrs. bernick: a book like that really gives one something to think
about.

rorlund: quite so; it presents a salutary contrast to what,
unfortunately, meets our eyes every day in the newspapers and
magazines. look at the gilded and painted exterior displayed by any
large community, and think what it really conceals!--emptiness and
rottenness, if i may say so; no foundation of morality beneath it. in a
word, these large communities of ours now-a-days are whited sepulchres.

mrs. holt: how true! how true!

mrs. rummel: and for an example of it, we need look no farther than at
the crew of the american ship that is lying here just now.

rorlund: oh, i would rather not speak of such offscourings of humanity
as that. but even in higher circles--what is the case there? a spirit
of doubt and unrest on all sides; minds never at peace, and instability
characterising all their behaviour. look how completely family life is
undermined over there! look at their shameless love of casting doubt on
even the most serious truths!

dina (without looking up from her work): but are there not many big
things done there too?

rorlund: big things done--? i do not understand--.

mrs. holt (in amazement): good gracious, dina--!

mrs. rummel (in the same breath): dina, how can you--?

rorlund: i think it would scarcely be a good thing for us if such "big
things" became the rule here. no, indeed, we ought to be only too
thankful that things are as they are in this country. it is true enough
that tares grow up amongst our wheat here too, alas; but we do our best
conscientiously to weed them out as well as we are able. the important
thing is to keep society pure, ladies--to ward off all the hazardous
experiments that a restless age seeks to force upon us.

mrs. holt: and there are more than enough of them in the wind,
unhappily.

mrs. rummel: yes, you know last year we only by a hair's breadth
escaped the project of having a railway here.

mrs. bernick: ah, my husband prevented that.

rorlund: providence, mrs. bernick. you may be certain that your husband
was the instrument of a higher power when he refused to have anything
to do with the scheme.

mrs. bernick: and yet they said such horrible things about him in the
newspapers! but we have quite forgotten to thank you, mr. rorlund. it
is really more than friendly of you to sacrifice so much of your time
to us.

rorlund: not at all. this is holiday time, and--

mrs. bernick: yes, but it is a sacrifice all the same, mr. rorlund.

rorlund (drawing his chair nearer): don't speak of it, my dear lady.
are you not all of you making some sacrifice in a good cause?--and that
willingly and gladly? these poor fallen creatures for whose rescue we
are working may be compared to soldiers wounded on the field of battle;
you, ladies, are the kind-hearted sisters of mercy who prepare the lint
for these stricken ones, lay the bandages softly on their wounds, heal
them and cure them.

mrs. bernick: it must be a wonderful gift to be able to see everything
in such a beautiful light.

rorlund: a good deal of it is inborn in one--but it can be to a great
extent acquired, too. all that is needful is to see things in the light
of a serious mission in life. (to martha:) what do you say, miss
bernick? have you not felt as if you were standing on firmer ground
since you gave yourself up to your school work?

martha: i really do not know what to say. there are times, when i am in
the schoolroom down there, that i wish i were far away out on the
stormy seas.

rorlund: that is merely temptation, dear miss bernick. you ought to
shut the doors of your mind upon such disturbing guests as that. by the
"stormy seas"--for of course you do not intend me to take your words
literally--you mean the restless tide of the great outer world, where
so many are shipwrecked. do you really set such store on the life you
hear rushing by outside? only look out into the street. there they go,
walking about in the heat of the sun, perspiring and tumbling about
over their little affairs. no, we undoubtedly have the best of it, who
are able to sit here in the cool and turn our backs on the quarter from
which disturbance comes.

martha: yes, i have no doubt you are perfectly right.

rorlund: and in a house like this, in a good and pure home, where
family life shows in its fairest colours--where peace and harmony
rule-- (to mrs. bernick:) what are you listening to, mrs. bernick?

mrs. bernick (who has turned towards the door of bernick's room): they
are talking very loud in there.

rorlund: is there anything particular going on?

mrs. bernick: i don't know. i can hear that there is somebody with my
husband.

(hilmar tonnesen, smoking a cigar, appears in the doorway on the right,
but stops short at the sight of the company of ladies.)

hilmar: oh, excuse me-- (turns to go back.)

mrs. bernick: no, hilmar, come along in; you are not disturbing us. do
you want something?

hilmar: no, i only wanted to look in here--good morning, ladies. (to
mrs. bernick:) well, what is the result?

mrs. bernick: of what?

hilmar: karsten has summoned a meeting, you know.

mrs. bernick: has he? what about?

hilmar:  oh, it is this railway nonsense over again.

mrs. rummel: is it possible?

mrs. bernick: poor karsten, is he to have more annoyance over that?

rorlund:  but how do you explain that, mr. tonnesen? you know that last
year mr. bernick made it perfectly clear that he would not have a
railway here.

hilmar: yes, that is what i thought, too; but i met krap, his
confidential clerk, and he told me that the railway project had been
taken up again, and that mr. bernick was in consultation with three of
our local capitalists.

mrs. rummel: ah, i was right in thinking i heard my husband's voice.

hilmar:  of course mr. rummel is in it, and so are sandstad and michael
vigeland, "saint michael", as they call him.

rorlund:  ahem!

hilmar: i beg your pardon, mr. rorlund?

mrs. bernick: just when everything was so nice and peaceful.

hilmar: well, as far as i am concerned, i have not the slightest
objection to their beginning their squabbling again. it will be a
little diversion, any way.

rorlund: i think we can dispense with that sort of diversion.

hilmar: it depends how you are constituted. certain natures feel the
lust of battle now and then. but unfortunately life in a country town
does not offer much in that way, and it isn't given to every one to
(turns the leaves of the book rorlund has been reading). "woman as the
handmaid of society." what sort of drivel is this?

mrs. bernick: my dear hilmar, you must not say that. you certainly have
not read the book.

hilmar: no, and i have no intention of reading it, either.

mrs. bernick: surely you are not feeling quite well today.

hilmar: no, i am not.

mrs. bernick:  perhaps you did not sleep well last night?

hilmar: no, i slept very badly. i went for a walk yesterday evening for
my health's sake; and i finished up at the club and read a book about a
polar expedition. there is something bracing in following the
adventures of men who are battling with the elements.

mrs. rummel:  but it does not appear to have done you much good, mr.
tonnesen.

hilmar:  no, it certainly did not. i lay all night tossing about, only
half asleep, and dreamt that i was being chased by a hideous walrus.

olaf (who meanwhile has come up the steps from the garden): have you
been chased by a walrus, uncle?

hilmar: i dreamt it, you duffer! do you mean to say you are still
playing about with that ridiculous bow? why don't you get hold of a
real gun?

olaf: i should like to, but--

hilmar:  there is some sense in a thing like that; it is always an
excitement every time you fire it off.

olaf: and then i could shoot bears, uncle. but daddy won't let me.

mrs. bernick:  you really mustn't put such ideas into his head, hilmar.

hilmar:  hm! it's a nice breed we are educating up now-a-days, isn't
it! we talk a great deal about manly sports, goodness knows--but we
only play with the question, all the same; there is never any serious
inclination for the bracing discipline that lies in facing danger
manfully. don't stand pointing your crossbow at me, blockhead--it might
go off!

olaf:  no, uncle, there is no arrow in it.

hilmar:  you don't know that there isn't--there may be, all the same.
take it away, i tell you!--why on earth have you never gone over to
america on one of your father's ships? you might have seen a buffalo
hunt then, or a fight with red indians.

mrs. bernick:  oh, hilmar--!

olaf: i should like that awfully, uncle; and then perhaps i might meet
uncle johan and aunt lona.

hilmar: hm!--rubbish.

mrs. bernick: you can go down into the garden again now, olaf.

olaf: mother, may i go out into the street too?

mrs. bernick: yes, but not too far, mind.

(olaf runs down into the garden and out through the gate in the fence.)

rorlund: you ought not to put such fancies into the child's head, mr.
tonnesen.

hilmar:  no, of course he is destined to be a miserable stay-at-home,
like so many others.

rorlund:  but why do you not take a trip over there yourself?

hilmar: i? with my wretched health? of course i get no consideration on
that account. but putting that out of the question, you forget that one
has certain obligations to perform towards the community of which one
forms a part. there must be some one here to hold aloft the banner of
the ideal.--ugh, there he is shouting again!

the ladies: who is shouting?

hilmar: i am sure i don't know. they are raising their voices so loud
in there that it gets on my nerves.

mrs. bernick: i expect it is my husband, mr. tonnesen. but you must
remember he is so accustomed to addressing large audiences.

rorlund: i should not call the others low-voiced, either.

hilmar:  good lord, no!--not on any question that touches their
pockets. everything here ends in these petty material considerations.
ugh!

mrs. bernick: anyway, that is a better state of things than it used to
be when everything ended in mere frivolity.

mrs. lynge: things really used to be as bad as that here?

mrs. rummel: indeed they were, mrs. lynge. you may think yourself lucky
that you did not live here then.

mrs. holt:  yes, times have changed, and no mistake, when i look back
to the days when i was a girl.

mrs. rummel: oh, you need not look back more than fourteen or fifteen
years. god forgive us, what a life we led! there used to be a dancing
society and a musical society--

mrs. bernick:  and the dramatic club. i remember it very well.

mrs. rummel: yes, that was where your play was performed, mr. tonnesen.

hilmar (from the back of the room): what, what?

rorlund: a play by mr. tonnesen?

mrs. rummel: yes, it was long before you came here, mr. rorlund. and it
was only performed once.

mrs. lynge: was that not the play in which you told me you took the
part of a young man's sweetheart, mrs. rummel?

mrs. rummel (glancing towards rorlund): i? i really cannot remember,
mrs. lynge. but i remember well all the riotous gaiety that used to go
on.

mrs. holt: yes, there were houses i could name in which two large
dinner-parties were given in one week.

mrs. lynge: and surely i have heard that a touring theatrical company
came here, too?

mrs. rummel: yes, that was the worst thing of the lot.

mrs. holt (uneasily):  ahem!

mrs. rummel: did you say a theatrical company? no, i don't remember
that at all.

mrs. lynge: oh yes, and i have been told they played all sorts of mad
pranks. what is really the truth of those stories?

mrs. rummel: there is practically no truth in them, mrs. lynge.

mrs. holt: dina, my love, will you give me that linen?

mrs. bernick (at the same time): dina, dear, will you go and ask
katrine to bring us our coffee?

martha: i will go with you, dina. (dina and martha go out by the
farther door on, the left.)

mrs. bernick (getting up): will you excuse me for a few minutes? i
think we will have our coffee outside. (she goes out to the verandah
and sets to work to lay a table. rorlund stands in the doorway talking
to her. hilmar sits outside, smoking.)

mrs. rummel (in a low voice): my goodness, mrs. lynge, how you
frightened me!

mrs. lynge: i?

mrs. holt: yes, but you know it was you that began it, mrs. rummel.

mrs. rummel: i? how can you say such a thing, mrs. holt? not a syllable
passed my lips!

mrs. lynge: but what does it all mean?

mrs. rummel:  what made you begin to talk about--? think--did you not
see that dina was in the room?

mrs. lynge:  dina? good gracious, is there anything wrong with--?

mrs. holt: and in this house, too! did you not know it was mrs.
bernick's brother--?

mrs. lynge: what about him? i know nothing about it at all; i am quite
new to the place, you know.

mrs. rummel: have you not heard that--? ahem! (to her daughter) hilda,
dear, you can go for a little stroll in the garden?

mrs. holt: you go too, netta. and be very kind to poor dina when she
comes back. (hilda and netta go out into the garden.)

mrs. lynge: well, what about mrs. bernick's brother?

mrs. rummel: don't you know the dreadful scandal about him?

mrs. lynge: a dreadful scandal about mr. tonnesen?

mrs. rummel: good heavens, no. mr. tonnesen is her cousin, of course,
mrs. lynge. i am speaking of her brother--

mrs. holt: the wicked mr. tonnesen--

mrs. rummel: his name was johan. he ran away to america.

mrs. holt: had to run away, you must understand.

mrs. lynge: then it is he the scandal is about?

mrs. rummel: yes; there was something--how shall i put it?--there was
something of some kind between him and dina's mother. i remember it all
as if it were yesterday. johan tonnesen was in old mrs. bernick's
office then; karsten bernick had just come back from paris--he had not
yet become engaged--

mrs. lynge:  yes, but what was the scandal?

mrs. rummel: well, you must know that moller's company were acting in
the town that winter--

mrs. holt: and dorf, the actor, and his wife were in the company. all
the young men in the town were infatuated with her.

mrs. rummel: yes, goodness knows how they could think her pretty. well,
dorf came home late one evening--

mrs. holt: quite unexpectedly.

mrs. rummel: and found his-- no, really it isn't a thing one can talk
about.

mrs. holt: after all, mrs. rummel, he didn't find anything, because the
door was locked on the inside.

mrs. rummel: yes, that is just what i was going to say--he found the
door locked. and--just think of it--the man that was in the house had
to jump out of the window.

mrs. holt: right down from an attic window.

mrs. lynge: and that was mrs. bernick's brother?

mrs. rummel: yes, it was he.

mrs. lynge: and that was why he ran away to america?

mrs. holt: yes, he had to run away, you may be sure.

mrs. rummel: because something was discovered afterwards that was
nearly as bad; just think--he had been making free with the cash-box...

mrs. holt:  but, you know, no one was certain of that, mrs. rummel;
perhaps there was no truth in the rumour.

mrs. rummel: well, i must say--! wasn't it known all over the town? did
not old mrs. bernick nearly go bankrupt as the result of it?  however,
god forbid i should be the one to spread such reports.

mrs. holt:  well, anyway, mrs. dorf didn't get the money, because she--

mrs. lynge:  yes, what happened to dina's parents afterwards?

mrs. rummel:  well, dorf deserted both his wife and his child. but
madam was impudent enough to stay here a whole year. of course she had
not the face to appear at the theatre any more, but she kept herself by
taking in washing and sewing--

mrs. holt: and then she tried to set up a dancing school.

mrs. rummel: naturally that was no good. what parents would trust their
children to such a woman? but it did not last very long. the fine madam
was not accustomed to work; she got something wrong with her lungs and
died of it.

mrs. lynge: what a horrible scandal!

mrs. rummel:  yes, you can imagine how hard it was upon the bernicks.
it is the dark spot among the sunshine of their good fortune, as rummel
once put it. so never speak about it in this house, mrs. lynge.

mrs. holt:  and for heaven's sake never mention the stepsister, either!

mrs. lynge:  oh, so mrs. bernick has a step-sister, too?

mrs. rummel:  had, luckily-- for the relationship between them is all
over now. she was an extraordinary person too! would you believe it,
she cut her hair short, and used to go about in men's boots in bad
weather!

mrs. holt:  and when her step-brother, the black sheep, had gone away,
and the whole town naturally was talking about him--what do you think
she did? she went out to america to him!

mr. rummel:  yes, but remember the scandal she caused before she went,
mrs. holt.

mrs. holt:  hush, don't speak of it.

mrs. lynge: my goodness, did she create a scandal too?

mrs. rummel: i think you ought to hear it, mrs. lynge. mr. bernick had
just got engaged to betty tonnesen, and the two of them went arm in arm
into her aunt's room to tell her the news--

mrs. holt: the tonnesens' parents were dead, you know--

mrs. rummel:  when, suddenly, up got lona hessel from her chair and
gave our refined and well-bred karsten bernick such a box on the ear
that his head swam.

mrs. lynge:  well, i am sure i never--

mrs. holt: it is absolutely true.

mrs. rummel: and then she packed her box and went away to america.

mrs. lynge: i suppose she had had her eye on him for herself.

mrs. rummel:  of course she had. she imagined that he and she would
make a match of it when he came back from paris.

mrs. holt:  the idea of her thinking such a thing!  karsten bernick--a
man of the world and the pink of courtesy, a perfect gentleman, the
darling of all the ladies...

mrs. rummel:  and, with it all, such an excellent young man, mrs.
holt--so moral.

mrs. lynge:  but what has this miss hessel made of herself in america?

mrs. rummel:  well, you see, over that (as my husband once put it) has
been drawn a veil which one should hesitate to lift.

mrs. lynge:  what do you mean?

mrs. rummel: she no longer has any connection with the family, as you
may suppose; but this much the whole town knows, that she has sung for
money in drinking saloons over there--

mrs. holt:  and has given lectures in public--

mrs. rummel:  and has published some mad kind of book.

mrs. lynge:  you don't say so!

mrs. rummel:  yes, it is true enough that lona hessel is one of the
spots on the sun of the bernick family's good fortune. well, now you
know the whole story, mrs. lynge. i am sure i would never have spoken
about it except to put you on your guard.

mrs. lynge:  oh, you may be sure i shall be most careful. but that poor
child dina dorf! i am truly sorry for her.

mrs. rummel:  well, really it was a stroke of good luck for her. think
what it would have meant if she had been brought up by such parents! of
course we did our best for her, every one of us, and gave her all the
good advice we could. eventually miss bernick got her taken into this
house.

mrs. holt:  but she has always been a difficult child to deal with. it
is only natural--with all the bad examples she had had before her. a
girl of that sort is not like one of our own; one must be lenient with
her.

mrs. rummel:  hush--here she comes. (in a louder voice.) yes, dina is
really a clever girl. oh, is that you, dina? we are just putting away
the things.

mrs. holt:  how delicious your coffee smells, my dear dina. a nice cup
of coffee like that--

mrs. bernick (calling in from the verandah):  will you come out here?
(meanwhile martha and dina have helped the maid to bring out the
coffee. all the ladies seat themselves on the verandah, and talk with a
great show of kindness to dina. in a few moments dina comes back into
the room and looks for her sewing.)

mrs. bernick (from the coffee table): dina, won't you--?

dina:  no, thank you. (sits down to her sewing. mrs. bernick and
rorlund exchange a few words; a moment afterwards he comes back into
the room, makes a pretext for going up to the table, and begins
speaking to dina in low tones.)

rorlund: dina.

dina:  yes?

rorlund:  why don't you want to sit with the others?

dina:  when i came in with the coffee, i could see from the strange
lady's face that they had been talking about me.

rorlund:  but did you not see as well how agreeable she was to you out
there?

dina:  that is just what i will not stand

rorlund:  you are very self-willed, dina.

dina:  yes.

rorlund:  but why?

dina:  because it is my nature.

rorlund:  could you not try to alter your nature?

dina:  no.

rorlund:  why not?

dina (looking at him): because i am one of the "poor fallen creatures",
you know.

rorlund:  for shame, dina.

dina:  so was my mother.

rorlund:  who has spoken to you about such things?

dina:  no one; they never do. why don't they? they all handle me in
such a gingerly fashion, as if they thought i should go to pieces if
they---. oh, how i hate all this kind-heartedness.

rorlund:  my dear dina, i can quite understand that you feel repressed
here, but--

dina:  yes; if only i could get right away from here. i could make my
own way quite well, if only i did not live amongst people who are
so--so--

rorlund:  so what?

dina:  so proper and so moral.

rorlund:  oh but, dina, you don't mean that.

dina:  you know quite well in what sense i mean it. hilda and netta
come here every day, to be exhibited to me as good examples. i can
never be so beautifully behaved as they; i don't want to be. if only i
were right away from it all, i should grow to be worth something.

rorlund:  but you are worth a great deal, dina dear.

dina:  what good does that do me here?

rorlund:  get right away, you say? do you mean it seriously?

dina:  i would not stay here a day longer, if it were not for you.

rorlund: tell me, dina--why is it that you are fond of being with me?

dina:  because you teach me so much that is beautiful.

rorlund:  beautiful? do you call the little i can teach you, beautiful?

dina: yes. or perhaps, to be accurate, it is not that you teach me
anything; but when i listen to you talking i see beautiful visions.

rorlund: what do you mean exactly when you call a thing beautiful?

dina: i have never thought it out.

rorlund: think it out now, then. what do you understand by a beautiful
thing?

dina: a beautiful thing is something that is great--and far off.

rorlund: hm!--dina, i am so deeply concerned about you, my dear.

dina: only that?

rorlund: you know perfectly well that you are dearer to me than i can
say.

dina: if i were hilda or netta, you would not be afraid to let people
see it.

rorlund: ah, dina, you can have no idea of the number of things i am
forced to take into consideration. when it is a man's lot to be a moral
pillar of the community he lives in, he cannot be too circumspect. if
only i could be certain that people would interpret my motives
properly. but no matter for that; you must, and shall be, helped to
raise yourself. dina, is it a bargain between us that when i come--when
circumstances allow me to come--to you and say: "here is my hand," you
will take it and be my wife? will you promise me that, dina?

dina: yes.

rorlund: thank you, thank you! because for my part, too--oh, dina, i
love you so dearly. hush! some one is coming. dina--for my sake--go out
to the others.(she goes out to the coffee table. at the same moment
rummel, sandstad and vigeland come out of bernick's room, followed by
bernick, who has a bundle of papers in his hand.)

bernick: well, then, the matter is settled.

vigeland: yes, i hope to goodness it is.

rummel: it is settled, bernick. a norseman's word stands as firm as the
rocks on dovrefjeld, you know!

bernick: and no one must falter, no one give way, no matter what
opposition we meet with.

rummel: we will stand or fall together, bernick.

hilmar (coming in from the verandah): fall? if i may ask, isn't it the
railway scheme that is going to fall?

bernick: no, on the contrary, it is going to proceed--

rummel: full steam, mr. tonnesen.

hilmar (coming nearer): really?

rorlund: how is that?

mrs. bernick (at the verandah door): karsten, dear, what is it that--?

bernick:  my dear betty, how can it interest you? (to the three men.)
we must get out lists of subscribers, and the sooner the better.
obviously our four names must head the list. the positions we occupy in
the community makes it our duty to make ourselves as prominent as
possible in the affair.

sandstad: obviously, mr. bernick.

rummel: the thing shall go through, bernick; i swear it shall!

bernick: oh, i have not the least anticipation of failure. we must see
that we work, each one among the circle of his own acquaintances; and
if we can point to the fact that the scheme is exciting a lively
interest in all ranks of society, then it stands to reason that our
municipal corporation will have to contribute its share.

mrs. bernick: karsten, you really must come out here and tell us--

bernick: my dear betty, it is an affair that does not concern ladies at
all.

hilmar: then you are really going to support this railway scheme after
all?

bernick: yes, naturally.

rorlund: but last year, mr. bernick--

bernick: last year it was quite another thing. at that time it was a
question of a line along the coast--

vigeland:  which would have been quite superfluous, mr. rorlund;
because, of course, we have our steamboat service--

sandstad:  and would have been quite unreasonably costly--

rummel:  yes, and would have absolutely ruined certain important
interests in the town.

bernick: the main point was that it would not have been to the
advantage of the community as a whole. that is why i opposed it, with
the result that the inland line was resolved upon.

hilmar:  yes, but surely that will not touch the towns about here.

bernick: it will eventually touch our town, my dear hilmar, because we
are going to build a branch line here.

hilmar: aha--a new scheme, then?

rummel: yes, isn't it a capital scheme? what?

rorlund: hm!--

vigeland: there is no denying that it looks as though providence had
just planned the configuration of the country to suit a branch line.

rorlund: do you really mean it, mr. vigeland?

bernick: yes, i must confess it seems to me as if it had been the hand
of providence that caused me to take a journey on business this spring,
in the course of which i happened to traverse a valley through which i
had never been before. it came across my mind like a flash of lightning
that this was where we could carry a branch line down to our town. i
got an engineer to survey the neighbourhood, and have here the
provisional calculations and estimate; so there is nothing to hinder us.

mrs. bernick (who is still with the other ladies at the verandah door):
but, my dear karsten, to think that you should have kept it all a
secret from us!

bernick: ah, my dear betty, i knew you would not have been able to
grasp the exact situation. besides, i have not mentioned it to a living
soul until today. but now the decisive moment has come, and we must
work openly and with all our might. yes, even if i have to risk all i
have for its sake, i mean to push the matter through.

rummel: and we will back you up, bernick; you may rely upon that.

rorlund: do you really promise us so much, then, from this undertaking,
gentlemen?

bernick: yes, undoubtedly. think what a lever it will be to raise the
status of our whole community. just think of the immense tracts of
forest-land that it will make accessible; think of all the rich
deposits of minerals we shall be able to work; think of the river with
one waterfall above another! think of the possibilities that open out
in the way of manufactories!

rorlund: and are you not afraid that an easier intercourse with the
depravity of the outer world--?

bernick: no, you may make your mind quite easy on that score, mr.
rorlund. our little hive of industry rests now-a-days, god be thanked,
on such a sound moral basis; we have all of us helped to drain it, if i
may use the expression; and that we will continue to do, each in his
degree. you, mr. rorlund, will continue your richly blessed activity in
our schools and our homes. we, the practical men of business, will be
the support of the community by extending its welfare within as wide a
radius as possible; and our women--yes, come nearer ladies--you will
like to hear it--our women, i say, our wives and daughters--you,
ladies--will work on undisturbed in the service of charity, and
moreover will be a help and a comfort to your nearest and dearest, as
my dear betty and martha are to me and olaf.(looks around him.) where
is olaf today?

mrs. bernick: oh, in the holidays it is impossible to keep him at home.

bernick: i have no doubt he is down at the shore again. you will see he
will end by coming to some harm there.

hilmar: bah! a little sport with the forces of nature

mrs. rummel:  your family affection is beautiful, mr. bernick!

bernick: well, the family is the kernel of society. a good home,
honoured and trusty friends, a little snug family circle where no
disturbing elements can cast their shadow-- (krap comes in from the
right, bringing letters and papers.)

krap: the foreign mail, mr. bernick--and a telegram from new york.

bernick (taking the telegram): ah--from the owners of the "indian girl".

rummel: is the mail in? oh, then you must excuse me.

vigeland:  and me too.

sandstad: good day, mr. bernick.

bernick: good day, good day, gentlemen. and remember, we have a meeting
this afternoon at five o'clock.

the three men: yes--quite so--of course. (they go out to the right.)

bernick (who has read the telegram): this is thoroughly american!
absolutely shocking!

mrs. bernick: good gracious, karsten, what is it?

bernick: look at this, krap! read it!

krap (reading):  "do the least repairs possible. send over 'indian
girl' as soon as she is ready to sail; good time of year; at a pinch
her cargo will keep her afloat." well, i must say--

rorlund: you see the state of things in these vaunted great communities!

bernick: you are quite right; not a moment's consideration for human
life, when it is a question of making a profit. (to krap:) can the
"indian girl" go to sea in four--or five--days?

krap: yes, if mr. vigeland will agree to our stopping work on the "palm
tree" meanwhile.

bernick: hm--he won't. well, be so good as to look through the letters.
and look here, did you see olaf down at the quay?

krap: no, mr. bernick. (goes into bernick's room.)

bernick (looking at the telegram again): these gentlemen think nothing
of risking eight men's lives--

hilmar: well, it is a sailor's calling to brave the elements; it must
be a fine tonic to the nerves to be like that, with only a thin plank
between one and the abyss--

bernick: i should like to see the ship-owner amongst us who would
condescend to such a thing! there is not one that would do it--not a
single one! (sees olaf coming up to the house.) ah, thank heaven, here
he is, safe and sound. (olaf, with a fishing-line in his hand, comes
running up the garden and in through the verandah.)

olaf: uncle hilmar, i have been down and seen the steamer.

bernick: have you been down to the quay again?

olaf: no, i have only been out in a boat. but just think, uncle hilmar,
a whole circus company has come on shore, with horses and animals; and
there were such lots of passengers.

mrs. rummel:  no, are we really to have a circus?

rorlund: we? i certainly have no desire to see it.

mrs. rummel:  no, of course i don't mean we, but--

dina: i should like to see a circus very much.

olaf: so should i.

hilmar: you are a duffer. is that anything to see? mere tricks. no, it
would be something quite different to see the gaucho careering over the
pampas on his snorting mustang. but, heaven help us, in these wretched
little towns of ours.

olaf (pulling at martha's dress): look, aunt martha! look, there they
come!

mrs. holt:  good lord, yes--here they come.

mrs. lynge: ugh, what horrid people!

(a number of passengers and a whole crowd of townsfolk, are seen coming
up the street.)

mrs. rummel: they are a set of mountebanks, certainly. just look at
that woman in the grey dress, mrs. holt--the one with a knapsack over
her shoulder.

mrs. holt:  yes--look--she has slung it on the handle of her parasol.
the manager's wife, i expect.

mrs. rummel:  and there is the manager himself, no doubt. he looks a
regular pirate. don't look at him, hilda!

mrs. holt: nor you, netta!

olaf: mother, the manager is bowing to us.

bernick: what?

mrs. bernick: what are you saying, child?

mrs. rummel: yes, and--good heavens--the woman is bowing to us too.

bernick: that is a little too cool--

martha (exclaims involuntarily):  ah--!

mrs. bernick:  what is it, martha?

martha:  nothing, nothing. i thought for a moment--

olaf (shrieking with delight): look, look, there are the rest of them,
with the horses and animals! and there are the americans, too! all the
sailors from the "indian girl"! (the strains of "yankee doodle," played
on a clarinet and a drum, are heard.)

hilmar (stopping his ears): ugh, ugh, ugh!

rorlund: i think we ought to withdraw ourselves from sight a little,
ladies; we have nothing to do with such goings on. let us go to our
work again.

mrs. bernick: do you think we had better draw the curtains?

rorlund: yes, that was exactly what i meant.

(the ladies resume their places at the work-table; rorlund shuts the
verandah door, and draws the curtains over it and over the windows, so
that the room becomes half dark.)

olaf (peeping out through the curtains): mother, the manager's wife is
standing by the fountain now, washing her face.

mrs. bernick: what? in the middle of the marketplace?

mrs. rummel: and in broad daylight, too!

hilmar: well, i must say if i were travelling across a desert waste and
found myself beside a well, i am sure i should not stop to think
whether--. ugh, that frightful clarinet!

rorlund: it is really high time the police interfered.

bernick: oh no; we must not be too hard on foreigners. of course these
folk have none of the deep-seated instincts of decency which restrain
us within proper bounds. suppose they do behave outrageously, what does
it concern us? fortunately this spirit of disorder, that flies in the
face of all that is customary and right, is absolutely a stranger to
our community, if i may say so--. what is this! (lona hessel walks
briskly in from the door on the right.)

the ladies (in low, frightened tones): the circus woman! the manager's
wife!

mrs. bernick: heavens, what does this mean?

martha (jumping up):  ah--!

lona:  how do you do, betty dear! how do you do, martha! how do you do,
brother-in-law!

mrs. bernick (with a cry):  lona--!

bernick (stumbling backwards):  as sure as i am alive--!

mrs. holt:  mercy on us--!

mrs. rummel:  it cannot possibly be--!

hilmar: well! ugh!

mrs. bernick:  lona--! is it really--?

lona:  really me? yes, indeed it is; you may fall on my neck if you
like.

hilmar: ugh, ugh!

mrs. bernick:  and coming back here as--?

mrs. bernick:  and actually mean to appear in--?

lona: appear? appear in what?

bernick: well, i mean--in the circus--

lona: ha, ha, ha! are you mad, brother-in-law? do you think i belong to
the circus troupe? no, certainly i have turned my hand to a good many
things and made a fool of myself in a good many ways--

mrs. rummel:  hm!

lona: but i have never tried circus riding.

bernick: then you are not--?

mrs. bernick:  thank heaven!

lona: no, we travelled like other respectable folk, second-class,
certainly, but we are accustomed to that.

mrs. bernick:  we, did you say?

bernick (taking a step for-ward): whom do you mean by "we"?

lona: i and the child, of course.

the ladies (with a cry): the child!

hilmar: what?

rorlund: i really must say--!

mrs. bernick:  but what do you mean, lona?

lona: i mean john, of course; i have no other child, as far as i know,
but john, or johan as you used to call him.

mrs. bernick:  johan--

mrs. rummel (in an undertone to mrs. lynge): the scapegrace brother!

bernick (hesitatingly): is johan with you?

lona:  of course he is; i certainly would not come without him. why do
you look so tragical? and why are you sitting here in the gloom, sewing
white things? there has not been a death in the family, has there?

rorlund: madam, you find yourself in the society for fallen women.

lona (half to herself): what? can these nice, quiet-looking ladies
possibly be--?

mrs. rummel: well, really--!

lona: oh, i understand! but, bless my soul, that is surely mrs. rummel?
and mrs. holt sitting there too! well, we three have not grown younger
since the last time we met. but listen now, good people; let the fallen
women wait for a day--they will be none the worse for that. a joyful
occasion like this--

rorlund:  a home-coming is not always a joyful occasion.

lona: indeed? how do you read your bible, mr. parson?

rorlund: i am not a parson.

lona: oh, you will grow into one, then. but--faugh!--this moral linen
of yours smells tainted, just like a winding-sheet. i am accustomed to
the air of the prairies, let me tell you.

bernick (wiping his forehead): yes, it certainly is rather close in
here.

lona: wait a moment; we will resurrect ourselves from this vault.
(pulls the curtains to one side) we must have broad daylight in here
when the boy comes. ah, you will see a boy then that has washed himself.

hilmar: ugh!

lona (opening the verandah door and window): i should say, when he has
washed himself, up at the hotel--for on the boat he got piggishly dirty.

hilmar: ugh, ugh!

lona: ugh? why, surely isn't that--? (points at hildar and asks the
others): is he still loafing about here saying "ugh"?

hilmar: i do not loaf; it is the state of my health that keeps me here.

rorlund: ahem! ladies, i do not think--

lona (who has noticed olaf): is he yours, betty? give me a paw, my boy!
or are you afraid of your ugly old aunt?

rorlund (putting his book under his arm): ladies, i do not think any of
us is in the mood for any more work today. i suppose we are to meet
again tomorrow?

lona (while the others are getting up and taking their leave): yes, let
us. i shall be on the spot.

rorlund: you? pardon me, miss hessel, but what do you propose to do in
our society?

lona: i will let some fresh air into it, mr. parson.




act ii


(scene.--the same room. mrs. bernick is sitting alone at the
work-table, sewing. bernick comes in from the right, wearing his hat
and gloves and carrying a stick.)

mrs. bernick: home already, karsten?

bernick: yes, i have made an appointment with a man.

mrs. bernick (with a sigh): oh yes, i suppose johan is coming up here
again.

bernick: with a man, i said. (lays down his hat.) what has become of
all the ladies today?

mrs. bernick: mrs. rummel and hilda hadn't time to come.

bernick: oh!--did they send any excuse?

mrs. bernick: yes, they had so much to do at home.

bernick: naturally. and of course the others are not coming either?

mrs. bernick: no, something has prevented them today, too.

bernick: i could have told you that, beforehand. where is olaf?

mrs. bernick: i let him go out a little with dina.

bernick: hm--she is a giddy little baggage. did you see how she at once
started making a fuss of johan yesterday?

mrs. bernick: but, my dear karsten, you know dina knows nothing
whatever of--

bernick: no, but in any case johan ought to have had sufficient tact
not to pay her any attention. i saw quite well, from his face, what
vigeland thought of it.

mrs. bernick (laying her sewing down on her lap): karsten, can you
imagine what his objective is in coming here?

bernick: well--i know he has a farm over there, and i fancy he is not
doing particularly well with it; she called attention yesterday to the
fact that they were obliged to travel second class--

mrs. bernick: yes, i am afraid it must be something of that sort. but
to think of her coming with him! she! after the deadly insult she
offered you!

bernick: oh, don't think about that ancient history.

mrs. bernick: how can i help thinking of it just now? after all, he is
my brother--still, it is not on his account that i am distressed, but
because of all the unpleasantness it would mean for you. karsten, i am
so dreadfully afraid!

bernick: afraid of what?

mrs. bernick: isn't it possible that they may send him to prison for
stealing that money from your mother?

bernick: what rubbish! who can prove that the money was stolen?

mrs. bernick: the whole town knows it, unfortunately; and you know you
said yourself.

bernick: i said nothing. the town knows nothing whatever about the
affair; the whole thing was no more than idle rumour.

mrs. bernick: how magnanimous you are, karsten!

bernick: do not let us have any more of these reminiscences, please!
you don't know how you torture me by raking all that up. (walks up and
down; then flings his stick away from him.) and to think of their
coming home now--just now, when it is particularly necessary for me
that i should stand well in every respect with the town and with the
press. our newspaper men will be sending paragraphs to the papers in
the other towns about here. whether i receive them well, or whether i
receive them ill, it will all be discussed and talked over. they will
rake up all those old stories--as you do. in a community like
ours--(throws his gloves down on the table.) and i have not a soul here
to whom i can talk about it and to whom i can go for support.

mrs. bernick: no one at all, karsten?

bernick: no--who is there? and to have them on my shoulders just at
this moment! without a doubt they will create a scandal in some way or
another--she, in particular. it is simply a calamity to be connected
with such folk in any way!

mrs. bernick: well, i can't help their--

bernick: what can't you help? their being your relations? no, that is
quite true.

mrs. bernick: and i did not ask them to come home.

bernick: that's it--go on! "i did not ask them to come home; i did not
write to them; i did not drag them home by the hair of their heads!"
oh, i know the whole rigmarole by heart.

mrs. bernick (bursting into tears): you need not be so unkind--

bernick: yes, that's right--begin to cry, so that our neighbours may
have that to gossip about too. do stop being so foolish, betty. go and
sit outside; some one may come in here. i don't suppose you want people
to see the lady of the house with red eyes? it would be a nice thing,
wouldn't it, if the story got out about that--. there, i hear some one
in the passage. (a knock is heard at the door.) come in! (mrs. bernick
takes her sewing and goes out down the garden steps. aune comes in from
the right.)

aune: good morning, mr. bernick.

bernick: good morning. well, i suppose you can guess what i want you
for?

aune: mr. krap told me yesterday that you were not pleased with--

bernick: i am displeased with the whole management of the yard, aune.
the work does not get on as quickly as it ought. the "palm tree" ought
to have been under sail long ago. mr. vigeland comes here every day to
complain about it; he is a difficult man to have with one as part owner.

aune: the "palm tree" can go to sea the day after tomorrow.

bernick: at last. but what about the american ship, the "indian girl,"
which has been laid up here for five weeks and--

aune: the american ship? i understood that, before everything else, we
were to work our hardest to get your own ship ready.

bernick: i gave you no reason to think so. you ought to have pushed on
as fast as possible with the work on the american ship also; but you
have not.

aune: her bottom is completely rotten, mr. bernick; the more we patch
it, the worse it gets.

bernick: that is not the reason. krap has told me the whole truth. you
do not understand how to work the new machines i have provided--or
rather, you will not try to work them.

aune: mr. bernick, i am well on in the fifties; and ever since i was a
boy i have been accustomed to the old way of working--

bernick:  we cannot work that way now-a-days. you must not imagine,
aune, that it is for the sake of making profit; i do not need that,
fortunately; but i owe consideration to the community i live in, and to
the business i am at the head of. i must take the lead in progress, or
there would never be any.

aune: i welcome progress too, mr. bernick.

bernick: yes, for your own limited circle--for the working class. oh, i
know what a busy agitator you are; you make speeches, you stir people
up; but when some concrete instance of progress presents itself--as
now, in the case of our machines--you do not want to have anything to
do with it; you are afraid.

aune: yes, i really am afraid, mr. bernick. i am afraid for the number
of men who will have the bread taken out of their mouths by these
machines. you are very fond, sir, of talking about the consideration we
owe to the community; it seems to me, however, that the community has
its duties too. why should science and capital venture to introduce
these new discoveries into labour, before the community has had time to
educate a generation up to using them?

bernick: you read and think too much, aune; it does you no good, and
that is what makes you dissatisfied with your lot.

aune: it is not, mr. bernick; but i cannot bear to see one good workman
dismissed after another, to starve because of these machines.

bernick: hm! when the art of printing was discovered, many a
quill-driver was reduced to starvation.

aune: would you have admired the art so greatly if you had been a
quill-driver in those days, sir?

bernick: i did not send for you to argue with you. i sent for you to
tell you that the "indian girl" must be ready to put to sea the day
after tomorrow.

aune: but, mr. bernick--

bernick: the day after tomorrow, do you hear?--at the same time as our
own ship, not an hour later. i have good reasons for hurrying on the
work. have you seen today's paper? well, then you know the pranks these
american sailors have been up to again. the rascally pack are turning
the whole town upside down. not a night passes without some brawling in
the taverns or the streets--not to speak of other abominations.

aune: yes, they certainly are a bad lot.

bernick: and who is it that has to bear the blame for all this
disorder? it is i! yes, it is i who have to suffer for it. these
newspaper fellows are making all sorts of covert insinuations because
we are devoting all our energies to the "palm tree." i, whose task in
life it is to influence my fellow-citizens by the force of example,
have to endure this sort of thing cast in my face. i am not going to
stand that. i have no fancy for having my good name smirched in that
way.

aune: your name stands high enough to endure that and a great deal
more, sir.

bernick: not just now. at this particular moment i have need of all the
respect and goodwill my fellow-citizens can give me. i have a big
undertaking on, the stocks, as you probably have heard; but, if it
should happen that evil-disposed persons succeeded in shaking the
absolute confidence i enjoy, it might land me in the greatest
difficulties. that is why i want, at any price, to avoid these shameful
innuendoes in the papers, and that is why i name the day after tomorrow
as the limit of the time i can give you.

aune: mr. bernick, you might just as well name this afternoon as the
limit.

bernick: you mean that i am asking an impossibility?

aune: yes, with the hands we have now at the yard.

bernick: very good; then we must look about elsewhere.

aune: do you really mean, sir, to discharge still more of your old
workmen?

bernick: no, i am not thinking of that.

aune: because i think it would cause bad blood against you both among
the townsfolk and in the papers, if you did that.

bernick: very probably; therefore, we will not do it. but, if the
"indian girl" is not ready to sail the day after tomorrow, i shall
discharge you.

aune (with a start): me! (he laughs.) you are joking, mr. bernick.

bernick: i should not be so sure of that, if i were you.

aune: do you mean that you can contemplate discharging me?--me, whose
father and grandfather worked in your yard all their lives, as i have
done myself--?

bernick: who is it that is forcing me to do it?

aune: you are asking what is impossible, mr. bernick.

bernick: oh, where there's a will there's a way. yes or no; give me a
decisive answer, or consider yourself discharged on the spot.

aune (coming a step nearer to him): mr. bernick, have you ever realised
what discharging an old workman means? you think he can look about for
another job? oh, yes, he can do that; but does that dispose of the
matter? you should just be there once, in the house of a workman who
has been discharged, the evening he comes home bringing all his tools
with him.

bernick: do you think i am discharging you with a light heart? have i
not always been a good master to you?

aune: so much the worse, mr. bernick. just for that very reason those
at home will not blame you; they will say nothing to me, because they
dare not; but they will look at me when i am not noticing, and think
that i must have deserved it. you see, sir, that is--that is what i
cannot bear. i am a mere nobody, i know; but i have always been
accustomed to stand first in my own home. my humble home is a little
community too, mr. bernick--a little community which i have been able
to support and maintain because my wife has believed in me and because
my children have believed in me. and now it is all to fall to pieces.

bernick: still, if there is nothing else for it, the lesser must go
down before the greater; the individual must be sacrificed to the
general welfare. i can give you no other answer; and that, and no
other, is the way of the world. you are an obstinate man, aune! you are
opposing me, not because you cannot do otherwise, but because you will
not exhibit 'the superiority of machinery over manual labour'.

aune: and you will not be moved, mr. bernick, because you know that if
you drive me away you will at all events have given the newspapers
proof of your good will.

bernick: and suppose that were so? i have told you what it means for
me--either bringing the press down on my back, or making them
well-disposed to me at a moment when i am working for an objective
which will mean the advancement of the general welfare. well, then, can
i do otherwise than as i am doing? the question, let me tell you, turns
upon this--whether your home is to be supported, as you put it, or
whether hundreds of new homes are to be prevented from
existing--hundreds of homes that will never be built, never have a fire
lighted on their hearth, unless i succeed in carrying through the
scheme i am working for now. that is the reason why i have given you
your choice.

aune: well, if that is the way things stand, i have nothing more to say.

bernick: hm--my dear aune, i am extremely grieved to think that we are
to part.

aune: we are not going to part, mr. bernick.

bernick: how is that?

aune: even a common man like myself has something he is bound to
maintain.

bernick: quite so, quite so--then i presume you think you may promise--?

aune: the "indian girl" shall be ready to sail the day after tomorrow.
(bows and goes out to the right.)

bernick: ah, i have got the better of that obstinate fellow! i take it
as a good omen. (hilmar comes in through the garden door, smoking a
cigar.)

hilmar (as he comes up the steps to the verandah): good morning, betty!
good morning, karsten!

mrs. bernick: good morning.

hilmar: ah, i see you have been crying, so i suppose you know all about
it too?

mrs. bernick: know all about what?

hilmar: that the scandal is in full swing. ugh!

bernick: what do you mean?

hilmar (coming into the room): why, that our two friends from america
are displaying themselves about the streets in the company of dina dorf.

mrs. bernick (coming in after him): hilmar, is it possible?

hilmar: yes, unfortunately, it is quite true. lona was even so wanting
in tact as to call after me, but of course i appeared not to have heard
her.

bernick: and no doubt all this has not been unnoticed.

hilmar: you may well say that. people stood still and looked at them.
it spread like wildfire through the town--just like a prairie fire out
west. in every house people were at the windows waiting for the
procession to pass, cheek by jowl behind the curtains--ugh! oh, you
must excuse me, betty, for saying "ugh"--this has got on my nerves. if
it is going on, i shall be forced to think about getting right away
from here.

mrs. bernick: but you should have spoken to him and represented to him
that--

hilmar: in the open street? no, excuse me, i could not do that. to
think that the fellow should dare to show himself in the town at all!
well, we shall see if the press doesn't put a stopper on him;
yes--forgive me, betty, but--

bernick: the press, do you say? have you heard a hint of anything of
the sort?

hilmar: there are such things flying about. when i left here yesterday
evening i looked in at the club, because i did not feel well. i saw at
once, from the sudden silence that fell when i went in, that our
american couple had been the subject of conversation. then that
impudent newspaper fellow, hammer, came in and congratulated me at the
top of his voice on the return of my rich cousin.

bernick: rich?

hilmar: those were his words. naturally i looked him up and down in the
manner he deserved, and gave him to understand that i knew nothing
about johan tonnesen's being rich. "really," he said, "that is very
remarkable. people usually get on in america when they have something
to start with, and i believe your cousin did not go over there quite
empty-handed."

bernick: hm--now will you oblige me by--

mrs. bernick (distressed): there, you see, karsten!

hilmar: anyhow, i have spent a sleepless night because of them. and
here he is, walking about the streets as if nothing were the matter.
why couldn't he disappear for good and all? it really is insufferable
how hard some people are to kill.

mrs. bernick: my dear hilmar, what are you saying p

hilmar: oh, nothing. but here this fellow escapes with a whole skin
from railway accidents and fights with california grizzlies and
blackfoot indians--has not even been scalped--. ugh, here they come!

bernick (looking down the street): olaf is with them too!

hilmar: of course! they want to remind everybody that they belong to
the best family in the town. look there!--look at the crowd of loafers
that have come out of the chemist's to stare at them and make remarks.
my nerves really won't stand it; how a man is to be expected to keep
the banner of the ideal flying under such circumstances, i--

bernick: they are coming here. listen, betty; it is my particular wish
that you should receive them in the friendliest possible way.

mrs. bernick: oh, may i, karsten.

bernick: certainly, certainly--and you too, hilmar. it is to be hoped
they will not stay here very long; and when we are quite by
ourselves--no allusions to the past; we must not hurt their feelings in
any way.

mrs. bernick: how magnanimous you are, karsten!

bernick: oh, don't speak of that.

mrs. bernick: but you must let me thank you; and you must forgive me
for being so hasty. i am sure you had every reason to--

bernick: don't talk about it, please.

hilmar: ugh!

(johan tonnesen and dina come up through the garden, followed by lona
and olaf.)

lona: good morning, dear people!

johan: we have been out having a look round the old place, karsten.

bernick: so i hear. greatly altered, is it not?

lona: mr. bernick's great and good works everywhere. we have been up
into the recreation ground you have presented to the town.

bernick: have you been there?

lona: "the gift of karsten bernick," as it says over the gateway. you
seem to be responsible for the whole place here.

johan: splendid ships you have got, too. i met my old schoolfellow, the
captain of the "palm tree."

lona: and you have built a new school-house too; and i hear that the
town has to thank you for both the gas supply and the water supply.

bernick: well, one ought to work for the good of the community one
lives in.

lona: that is an excellent sentiment, brother-in-law, but it is a
pleasure, all the same, to see how people appreciate you. i am not
vain, i hope; but i could not resist reminding one or two of the people
we talked to that we were relations of yours.

hilmar: ugh!

lona: do you say "ugh" to that?

hilmar: no, i said "ahem."

lona: oh, poor chap, you may say that if you like. but are you all by
yourselves today?

bernick: yes, we are by ourselves today.

lona: ah, yes, we met a couple of members of your morality society up
at the market; they made out they were very busy. you and i have never
had an opportunity for a good talk yet. yesterday you had your three
pioneers here, as well as the parson.

hilmar: the schoolmaster.

lona: i call him the parson. but now tell me what you think of my work
during these fifteen years? hasn't he grown a fine fellow? who would
recognise the madcap that ran away from home?

hilmar: hm!

johan: now, lona, don't brag too much about me.

lona: well, i can tell you i am precious proud of him. goodness knows
it is about the only thing i have done in my life; but it does give me
a sort of right to exist. when i think, johan, how we two began over
there with nothing but our four bare fists.

hilmar: hands.

lona: i say fists; and they were dirty fists.

hilmar: ugh!

lona: and empty, too.

hilmar: empty? well, i must say--

lona: what must you say?

bernick: ahem!

hilmar: i must say--ugh! (goes out through the garden.)

lona: what is the matter with the man?

bernick: oh, do not take any notice of him; his nerves are rather upset
just now. would you not like to take a look at the garden? you have not
been down there yet, and i have got an hour to spare.

lona: with pleasure. i can tell you my thoughts have been with you in
this garden many and many a time.

mrs. bernick: we have made a great many alterations there too, as you
will see. (bernick, mrs. bernick, and lona go down to the garden, where
they are visible every now and then during the following scene.)

olaf (coming to the verandah door): uncle hilmar, do you know what
uncle johan asked me? he asked me if i would go to america with him.

hilmar: you, you duffer, who are tied to your mother's apron strings--!

olaf: ah, but i won't be that any longer. you will see, when i grow big.

hilmar: oh, fiddlesticks! you have no really serious bent towards the
strength of character necessary to--.

(they go down to the garden. dina meanwhile has taken off her hat and
is standing at the door on the right, shaking the dust off her dress.)

johan (to dina): the walk has made you pretty warm.

dina: yes, it was a splendid walk. i have never had such a splendid
walk before.

johan: do you not often go for a walk in the morning?

dina: oh, yes--but only with olaf.

johan: i see.--would you rather go down into the garden than stay here?

dina: no, i would rather stay here.

johan: so would i. then shall we consider it a bargain that we are to
go for a walk like this together every morning?

dina: no, mr. tonnesen, you mustn't do that.

johan: what mustn't i do? you promised, you know.

dina: yes, but--on second thought--you mustn't go out with me.

johan: but why not?

dina: of course, you are a stranger--you cannot understand; but i must
tell you--

johan: well?

dina: no, i would rather not talk about it.

johan: oh, but you must; you can talk to me about whatever you like.

dina: well, i must tell you that i am not like the other young girls
here. there is something--something or other about me. that is why you
mustn't.

johan: but i do not understand anything about it. you have not done
anything wrong?

dina: no, not i, but--no, i am not going to talk any more about it now.
you will hear about it from the others, sure enough.

johan: hm!

dina: but there is something else i want very much to ask you.

johan: what is that?

dina: i suppose it is easy to make a position for oneself over in
america?

johan: no, it is not always easy; at first you often have to rough it
and work very hard.

dina: i should be quite ready to do that.

johan: you?

dina: i can work now; i am strong and healthy; and aunt martha taught
me a lot.

johan: well, hang it, come back with us!

dina: ah, now you are only making fun of me; you said that to olaf too.
but what i wanted to know is if people are so very--so very moral over
there?

johan: moral?

dina: yes; i mean are they as--as proper and as well-behaved as they
are here?

johan: well, at all events they are not so bad as people here make out.
you need not be afraid on that score.

dina: you don't understand me. what i want to hear is just that they
are not so proper and so moral.

johan: not? what would you wish them to be, then?

dina: i would wish them to be natural.

johan: well, i believe that is just what they are.

dina: because in that case i should get on if i went there.

johan: you would, for certain!--and that is why you must come back with
us.

dina: no, i don't want to go with you; i must go alone. oh, i would
make something of my life; i would get on--

bernick (speaking to lona and his wife at the foot of the garden
steps): wait a moment--i will fetch it, betty dear; you might so easily
catch cold. (comes into the room and looks for his wife's shawl.)

mrs. bernick (from outside): you must come out too, johan; we are going
down to the grotto.

bernick: no, i want johan to stay here. look here, dina; you take my
wife's shawl and go with them. johan is going to stay here with me,
betty dear. i want to hear how he is getting on over there.

mrs. bernick: very well--then you will follow us; you know where you
will find us. (mrs. bernick, lona and dina go out through the garden,
to the left. bernick looks after them for a moment, then goes to the
farther door on the left and locks it, after which he goes up to johan,
grasps both his hands, and shakes them warmly.)

bernick: johan, now that we are alone, you must let me thank you.

johan: oh, nonsense!

bernick: my home and all the happiness that it means to me--my position
here as a citizen--all these i owe to you.

johan: well, i am glad of it, karsten; some good came of that mad story
after all, then.

bernick (grasping his hands again): but still you must let me thank
you! not one in ten thousand would have done what you did for me.

johan: rubbish! weren't we, both of us, young and thoughtless? one of
us had to take the blame, you know.

bernick: but surely the guilty one was the proper one to do that?

johan: stop! at the moment the innocent one happened to be the proper
one to do it. remember, i had no ties--i was an orphan; it was a lucky
chance to get free from the drudgery of the office. you, on the other
hand, had your old mother still alive; and, besides that, you had just
become secretly engaged to betty, who was devoted to you. what would
have happened between you and her if it had come to her ears?

bernick: that is true enough, but still--

johan: and wasn't it just for betty's sake that you broke off your
acquaintance with mrs. dorf? why, it was merely in order to put an end
to the whole thing that you were up there with her that evening.

bernick: yes, that unfortunate evening when that drunken creature came
home! yes, johan, it was for betty's sake; but, all the same, it was
splendid of you to let all the appearances go against you, and to go
away.

johan: put your scruples to rest, my dear karsten. we agreed that it
should be so; you had to be saved, and you were my friend. i can tell
you, i was uncommonly proud of that friendship. here was i, drudging
away like a miserable stick-in-the-mud, when you came back from your
grand tour abroad, a great swell who had been to london and to paris;
and you chose me for your chum, although i was four years younger than
you--it is true it was because you were courting betty, i understand
that now--but i was proud of it! who would not have been? who would not
willingly have sacrificed himself for you?--especially as it only meant
a month's talk in the town, and enabled me to get away into the wide
world.

bernick: ah, my dear johan, i must be candid and tell you that the
story is not so completely forgotten yet.

johan: isn't it? well, what does that matter to me, once i am back over
there on my farm again?

bernick: then you mean to go back?

johan: of course.

bernick: but not immediately, i hope?

johan: as soon as possible. it was only to humour lona that i came over
with her, you know.

bernick: really? how so?

johan: well, you see, lona is no longer young, and lately she began to
be obsessed with home-sickness; but she never would admit it. (smiles.)
how could she venture to risk leaving such a flighty fellow as me
alone, who before i was nineteen had been mixed up in...

bernick: well, what then?

johan: well, karsten, now i am coming to a confession that i am ashamed
to make.

bernick: you surely haven't confided the truth to her?

johan: yes. it was wrong of me, but i could not do otherwise. you can
have no conception what lona has been to me. you never could put up
with her; but she has been like a mother to me. the first year we were
out there, when things went so badly with us, you have no idea how she
worked! and when i was ill for a long time, and could earn nothing and
could not prevent her, she took to singing ballads in taverns, and gave
lectures that people laughed at; and then she wrote a book that she has
both laughed and cried over since then--all to keep the life in me.
could i look on when in the winter she, who had toiled and drudged for
me, began to pine away? no, karsten, i couldn't. and so i said, "you go
home for a trip, lona; don't be afraid for me, i am not so flighty as
you think." and so--the end of it was that she had to know.

bernick: and how did she take it?

johan: well, she thought, as was true, that as i knew i was innocent
nothing need prevent me from taking a trip over here with her. but make
your mind easy; lona will let nothing out, and i shall keep my mouth
shut as i did before.

bernick: yes, yes i rely on that.

johan: here is my hand on it. and now we will say no more about that
old story; luckily it is the only mad prank either of us has been
guilty of, i am sure. i want thoroughly to enjoy the few days i shall
stay here. you cannot think what a delightful walk we had this morning.
who would have believed that that little imp, who used to run about
here and play angels' parts on the stage--! but tell me, my dear
fellow, what became of her parents afterwards?

bernick: oh, my boy, i can tell you no more than i wrote to you
immediately after you went away. i suppose you got my two letters?

johan: yes, yes, i have them both. so that drunken fellow deserted her?

bernick: and drank himself to death afterwards.

johan: and she died soon afterwards, too?

bernick: she was proud; she betrayed nothing, and would accept nothing.

johan: well, at all events you did the right thing by taking dina into
your house.

bernick: i suppose so. as a matter of fact it was martha that brought
that about.

johan: so it was martha? by the way, where is she today?

bernick: she? oh, when she hasn't her school to look after, she has her
sick people to see to.

johan: so it was martha who interested herself in her.

bernick: yes, you know martha has always had a certain liking for
teaching; so she took a post in the boarding-school. it was very
ridiculous of her.

johan: i thought she looked very worn yesterday; i should be afraid her
health was not good enough for it.

bernick: oh, as far as her health goes, it is all right enough. but it
is unpleasant for me; it looks as though i, her brother, were not
willing to support her.

johan: support her? i thought she had means enough of her own.

bernick: not a penny. surely you remember how badly off our mother was
when you went away? she carried things on for a time with my
assistance, but naturally i could not put up with that state of affairs
permanently. i made her take me into the firm, but even then things did
not go well. so i had to take over the whole business myself, and when
we made up our balance-sheet, it became evident that there was
practically nothing left as my mother's share. and when mother died
soon afterwards, of course martha was left penniless.

johan: poor martha!

bernick: poor! why? you surely do not suppose i let her want for
anything? no, i venture to say i am a good brother. of course she has a
home here with us; her salary as a teacher is more than enough for her
to dress on; what more could she want?

johan: hm--that is not our idea of things in america.

bernick: no, i dare say not--in such a revolutionary state of society
as you find there. but in our small circle--in which, thank god,
depravity has not gained a footing, up to now at all events--women are
content to occupy a seemly, as well as modest, position. moreover, it
is martha's own fault; i mean, she might have been provided for long
ago, if she had wished.

johan: you mean she might have married?

bernick: yes, and married very well, too. she has had several good
offers--curiously enough, when you think that she is a poor girl, no
longer young, and, besides, quite an insignificant person.

johan: insignificant?

bernick: oh, i am not blaming her for that. i most certainly would not
wish her otherwise. i can tell you it is always a good thing to have a
steady-going person like that in a big house like this--some one you
can rely on in any contingency.

johan: yes, but what does she--?

bernick: she? how? oh well, of course she has plenty to interest
herself in; she has betty and olaf and me. people should not think
first of themselves--women least of all. we have all got some
community, great or small, to work for. that is my principle, at all
events. (points to krap, who has come in from the right.) ah, here is
an example of it, ready to hand. do you suppose that it is my own
affairs that are absorbing me just now? by no means. (eagerly to krap.)
well?

krap (in an undertone, showing him a bundle of papers): here are all
the sale contracts, completed.

bernick: capital! splendid!--well, johan, you must really excuse me for
the present. (in a low voice, grasping his hand.) thanks, johan,
thanks! and rest assured that anything i can do for you-- well, of
course you understand. come along, krap. (they go into bernick's room.)

johan (looking after them for a moment): hm!-- (turns to go down to the
garden. at the same moment martha comes in from the right, with a
little basket over her arm.) martha!

martha: ah, johan--is it you?

johan: out so early?

martha: yes. wait a moment; the others are just coming. (moves towards
the door on the left.)

johan: martha, are you always in such a hurry?

martha: i?

johan: yesterday you seemed to avoid me, so that i never managed to
have a word with you--we two old playfellows.

martha: ah, johan; that is many, many years ago.

johan: good lord--why, it is only fifteen years ago, no more and no
less. do you think i have changed so much?

martha: you? oh yes, you have changed too, although--

johan: what do you mean?

martha: oh, nothing.

johan: you do not seem to be very glad to see me again.

martha: i have waited so long, johan--too long.

johan: waited? for me to come?

martha: yes.

johan. and why did you think i would come?

martha: to atone for the wrong you had done.

johan: i?

martha: have you forgotten that it was through you that a woman died in
need and in shame? have you forgotten that it was through you that the
best years of a young girl's life were embittered?

johan: and you can say such things to me? martha, has your brother
never--?

martha: never what?

johan: has he never--oh, of course, i mean has he never so much as said
a word in my defence?

martha: ah, johan, you know karsten's high principles.

johan: hm--! oh, of course; i know my old friend karsten's high
principles! but really this is--. well, well. i was having a talk with
him just now. he seems to me to have altered considerably.

martha: how can you say that? i am sure karsten has always been an
excellent man.

johan: yes, that was not exactly what i meant--but never mind. hm! now
i understand the light you have seen me in; it was the return of the
prodigal that you were waiting for.

martha: johan, i will tell you what light i have seen you in. (points
down to the garden.) do you see that girl playing on the grass down
there with olaf? that is dina. do you remember that incoherent letter
you wrote me when you went away? you asked me to believe in you. i have
believed in you, johan. all the horrible things that were rumoured
about you after you had gone must have been done through being led
astray--from thoughtlessness, without premeditation.

johan: what do you mean?

martha: oh! you understand me well enough--not a word more of that. but
of course you had to go away and begin afresh--a new life. your duties
here which you never remembered to undertake--or never were able to
undertake--i have undertaken for you. i tell you this, so that you
shall not have that also to reproach yourself with. i have been a
mother to that much-wronged child; i have brought her up as well as i
was able.

johan: and have wasted your whole life for that reason.

martha: it has not been wasted. but you have come late, johan.

johan: martha--if only i could tell you--. well, at all events let me
thank you for your loyal friendship.

martha (with a sad smile): hm.--well, we have had it out now, johan.
hush, some one is coming. goodbye, i can't stay now. (goes out through
the farther door on the left. lona comes in from the garden, followed
by mrs. bernick.)

mrs. bernick: but good gracious, lona--what are you thinking of?

lona: let me be, i tell you! i must and will speak to him.

mrs. bernick: but it would be a scandal of the worst sort! ah,
johan--still here?

lona: out with you, my boy; don't stay here in doors; go down into the
garden and have a chat with dina.

johan: i was just thinking of doing so.

mrs. bernick: but--

lona: look here, johan--have you had a good look at dina?

johan: i should think so!

lona: well, look at her to some purpose, my boy. that would be somebody
for you!

mrs. bernick: but, lona!

johan: somebody for me?

lona: yes, to look at, i mean. be off with you!

johan: oh, i don't need any pressing. (goes down into the garden.)

mrs. bernick: lona, you astound me! you cannot possibly be serious
about it?

lona: indeed i am. isn't she sweet and healthy and honest? she is
exactly the wife for johan. she is just what he needs over there; it
will be a change from an old step-sister.

mrs. bernick: dina? dina dorf? but think--

lona: i think first and foremost of the boy's happiness. because, help
him i must; he has not much idea of that sort of thing; he has never
had much of an eye for girls or women.

mrs. bernick: he? johan? indeed i think we have had only too sad proofs
that--

lona: oh, devil take all those stupid stories! where is karsten? i mean
to speak to him.

mrs. bernick: lona, you must not do it, i tell you.

lona: i am going to. if the boy takes a fancy to her--and she to
him--then they shall make a match of it. karsten is such a clever man,
he must find some way to bring it about.

mrs. bernick: and do you think these american indecencies will be
permitted here?

lona: bosh, betty!

mrs. bernick: do you think a man like karsten, with his strictly moral
way of thinking--

lona: pooh! he is not so terribly moral.

mrs. bernick: what have you the audacity to say?

lona: i have the audacity to say that karsten is not any more
particularly moral than anybody else.

mrs. bernick: so you still hate him as deeply as that! but what are you
doing here, if you have never been able to forget that? i cannot
understand how you, dare look him in the face after the shameful insult
you put upon him in the old days.

lona: yes, betty, that time i did forget myself badly.

mrs. bernick: and to think how magnanimously he has forgiven you--he,
who had never done any wrong! it was not his fault that you encouraged
yourself with hopes. but since then you have always hated me too.
(bursts into tears.) you have always begrudged me my good fortune. and
now you come here to heap all this on my head--to let the whole town
know what sort of a family i have brought karsten into. yes, it is me
that it all falls upon, and that is what you want. oh, it is abominable
of you! (goes out by the door on the left, in tears.)

lona (looking after her): poor betty! (bernick comes in from his room.
he stops at the door to speak to krap.)

bernick: yes, that is excellent, krap--capital! send twenty pounds to
the fund for dinners to the poor. (turns round.) lona! (comes forward.)
are you alone? is betty not coming in?

lona: no. would you like me to call her?

bernick: no, no--not at all. oh, lona, you don't know how anxious i
have been to speak openly to you--after having begged for your
forgiveness.

lona: look here, karsten--do not let us be sentimental; it doesn't suit
us.

bernick: you must listen to me, lona. i know only too well how much
appearances are against me, as you have learnt all about that affair
with dina's mother. but i swear to you that it was only a temporary
infatuation; i was really, truly and honestly, in love with you once.

lona: why do you think i have come home?

bernick: whatever you have in your mind, i entreat, you to do nothing
until i have exculpated myself. i can do that, lona; at all events i
can excuse myself.

lona: now you are frightened. you once were in love with me, you say.
yes, you told me that often enough in your letters; and perhaps it was
true, too--in a way--as long as you were living out in the great, free
world which gave you the courage to think freely and greatly. perhaps
you found in me a little more character and strength of will and
independence than in most of the folk at home here. and then we kept it
secret between us; nobody could make fun of your bad taste.

bernick: lona, how can you think--?

lona: but when you came back--when you heard the gibes that were made
at me on all sides--when you noticed how people laughed at what they
called my absurdities...

bernick: you were regardless of people's opinion at that time.

lona: chiefly to annoy the petticoated and trousered prudes that one
met at every turn in the town. and then, when you met that seductive
young actress--

bernick: it was a boyish escapade--nothing more; i swear to you that
there was no truth in a tenth part of the rumours and gossip that went
about.

lona: maybe. but then, when betty came home--a pretty young girl,
idolised by every one--and it became known that she would inherit all
her aunt's money and that i would have nothing!

bernick: that is just the point, lona; and now you shall have the truth
without any beating about the bush. i did not love betty then; i did
not break off my engagement with you because of any new attachment. it
was entirely for the sake of the money. i needed it; i had to make sure
of it.

lona: and you have the face to tell me that?

bernick: yes, i have. listen, lona.

lona: and yet you wrote to me that an unconquerable passion for betty
had overcome you--invoked my magnanimity--begged me, for betty's sake,
to hold my tongue about all that had been between us.

bernick: i had to, i tell you.

lona: now, by heaven, i don't regret that i forgot myself as i did that
time--

bernick: let me tell you the plain truth of how things stood with me
then. my mother, as you remember, was at the head of the business, but
she was absolutely without any business ability whatever. i was
hurriedly summoned home from paris; times were critical, and they
relied on me to set things straight. what did i find? i found--and you
must keep this a profound secret--a house on the brink of ruin. yes--as
good as on the brink of ruin, this old respected house which had seen
three generations of us. what else could i--the son, the only son--do
than look about for some means of saving it?

lona: and so you saved the house of bernick at the cost of a woman.

bernick: you know quite well that betty was in love with me.

lona: but what about me?

bernick: believe me, lona, you would never have been happy with me.

lona: was it out of consideration for my happiness that you sacrificed
me?

bernick: do you suppose i acted as i did from selfish motives? if i had
stood alone then, i would have begun all over again with cheerful
courage. but you do not understand how the life of a man of business,
with his tremendous responsibilities, is bound up with that of the
business which falls to his inheritance. do you realise that the
prosperity or the ruin of hundreds--of thousands--depends on him? can
you not take into consideration the fact that the whole community in
which both you and i were born would have been affected to the most
dangerous extent if the house of bernick had gone to smash?

lon: then is it for the sake of the community that you have maintained
your position these fifteen years upon a lie?

bernick: upon a lie?

lona: what does betty know of all this...that underlies her union with
you?

bernick: do you suppose that i would hurt her feelings to no purpose by
disclosing the truth?

lona: to no purpose, you say? well, well--you are a man of business;
you ought to understand what is to the purpose. but listen to me,
karsten--i am going to speak the plain truth now. tell me, are you
really happy?

bernick: in my family life, do you mean?

lona: yes.

bernick: i am, lona. you have not been a self-sacrificing friend to me
in vain. i can honestly say that i have grown happier every year. betty
is good and willing; and if i were to tell you how, in the course of
years, she has learned to model her character on the lines of my own--

lona: hm!

bernick: at first, of course, she had a whole lot of romantic notions
about love; she could not reconcile herself to the idea that, little by
little, it must change into a quiet comradeship.

lona: but now she is quite reconciled to that?

bernick: absolutely. as you can imagine, daily intercourse with me has
had no small share in developing her character. every one, in their
degree, has to learn to lower their own pretensions, if they are to
live worthily of the community to which they belong. and betty, in her
turn, has gradually learned to understand this; and that is why our
home is now a model to our fellow citizens.

lona: but your fellow citizens know nothing about the lie?

bernick: the lie?

lona: yes--the lie you have persisted in for these fifteen years.

bernick: do you mean to say that you call that--?

lona: i call it a lie--a threefold lie: first of all, there is the lie
towards me; then, the lie towards betty; and then, the lie towards
johan.

bernick: betty has never asked me to speak.

lona: because she has known nothing.

bernick: and you will not demand it--out of consideration for her.

lona: oh, no--i shall manage to put up with their gibes well enough; i
have broad shoulders.

bernick: and johan will not demand it either; he has promised me that.

lona: but you yourself, karsten? do you feel within yourself no impulse
urging you to shake yourself free of this lie?

bernick: do you suppose that of my own free will i would sacrifice my
family happiness and my position in the world?

lona: what right have you to the position you hold?

bernick: every day during these fifteen years i have earned some little
right to it--by my conduct, and by what i have achieved by my work.

lona: true, you have achieved a great deal by your work, for yourself
as well as for others. you are the richest and most influential man in
the town; nobody in it dares do otherwise than defer to your will,
because you are looked upon as a man without spot or blemish; your home
is regarded as a model home, and your conduct as a model of conduct.
but all this grandeur, and you with it, is founded on a treacherous
morass. a moment may come and a word may be spoken, when you and all
your grandeur will be engulfed in the morass, if you do not save
yourself in time.

bernick: lona--what is your object in coming here?

lona: i want to help you to get firm ground under your feet, karsten.

bernick: revenge!--you want to revenge yourself! i suspected it. but
you won't succeed! there is only one person here that can speak with
authority, and he will be silent.

lona: you mean johan?

bernick: yes, johan. if any one else accuses me, i shall deny
everything. if any one tries to crush me, i shall fight for my life.
but you will never succeed in that, let me tell you! the one who could
strike me down will say nothing--and is going away.

(rummel and vigeland come in from the right.)

rummel: good morning, my dear bernick, good morning. you must come up
with us to the commercial association. there is a meeting about the
railway scheme, you know.

bernick: i cannot. it is impossible just now.

vigeland: you really must, mr. bernick.

rummel: bernick, you must. there is an opposition to us on foot.
hammer, and the rest of those who believe in a line along the coast,
are declaring that private interests are at the back of the new
proposals.

bernick: well then, explain to them--

vigeland: our explanations have no effect, mr. bernick.

rummel: no, no, you must come yourself. naturally, no one would dare to
suspect you of such duplicity.

lona: i should think not.

bernick: i cannot, i tell you; i am not well. or, at all events,
wait--let me pull myself together. (rorlund comes in from the right.)

rorlund: excuse me, mr. bernick, but i am terribly upset.

bernick: why, what is the matter with you?

rorlund. i must put a question to you, mr. bernick. is it with your
consent that the young girl who has found a shelter under your roof
shows herself in the open street in the company of a person who--

lona: what person, mr. parson?

rorlund: with the person from whom, of all others in the world, she
ought to be kept farthest apart!

lona: ha! ha!

rorlund: is it with your consent, mr. bernick?

bernick (looking for his hat and gloves). i know nothing about it. you
must excuse me; i am in a great hurry. i am due at the commercial
association.

(hilmar comes up from the garden and goes over to the farther door on
the left.)

hilmar: betty--betty, i want to speak to you.

mrs. bernick (coming to the door): what is it?

hilmar: you ought to go down into the garden and put a stop to the
flirtation that is going on between a certain person and dina dorf! it
has quite got on my nerves to listen to them.

lona: indeed! and what has the certain person been saying?

hilmar: oh, only that he wishes she would go off to america with him.
ugh!

rorlund: is it possible?

mrs. bernick: what do you say?

lona: but that would be perfectly splendid!

bernick: impossible! you cannot have heard right.

hilmar: ask him yourself, then. here comes the pair of them. only,
leave me out of it, please.

bernick (to rummel and vigeland): i will follow you--in a moment.
(rummel and vigeland go out to the right. johan and dina come up from
the garden.)

johan: hurrah, lona, she is going with us!

mrs. bernick: but, johan--are you out of your senses?

rorlund: can i believe my ears! such an atrocious scandal! by what arts
of seduction have you--?

johan: come, come, sir--what are you saying?

rorlund: answer me, dina; do you mean to do this--entirely of your own
free will?

dina: i must get away from here.

rorlund: but with him!--with him!

dina: can you tell me of any one else here who would have the courage
to take me with him?

rorlund: very well, then--you shall learn who he is.

johan: do not speak!

bernick: not a word more!

rorlund: if i did not, i should be unworthy to serve a community of
whose morals i have been appointed a guardian, and should be acting
most unjustifiably towards this young girl, in whose upbringing i have
taken a material part, and who is to me--

johan: take care what you are doing!

rorlund: she shall know! dina, this is the man who was the cause of all
your mother's misery and shame.

bernick: mr. rorlund--?

dina:  he! (to johan.) is this true?

johan: karsten, you answer.

bernick: not a word more! do not let us say another word about it today.

dina: then it is true.

rorlund: yes, it is true. and more than that, this fellow--whom you
were going to trust--did not run away from home empty-handed; ask him
about old mrs. bernick's cash-box.... mr. bernick can bear witness to
that!

lona: liar

bernick: ah!

mrs. bernick: my god! my god!

johan (rushing at rorlund with uplifted arm): and you dare to--

lona (restraining him): do not strike him, johan!

rorlund: that is right, assault me! but the truth will out; and it is
the truth--mr. bernick has admitted it--and the whole town knows it.
now, dina, you know him. (a short silence.)

johan (softly, grasping bernick by the arm): karsten, karsten, what
have you done?

mrs. bernick (in tears): oh, karsten, to think that i should have mixed
you up in all this disgrace!

sandstad (coming in hurriedly from the right, and calling out, with his
hand still on the door-handle): you positively must come now, mr.
bernick. the fate of the whole railway is hanging by a thread.

bernick (abstractedly): what is it? what have i to--

lona (earnestly and with emphasis): you have to go and be a pillar of
society, brother-in-law.

sandstad: yes, come along; we need the full weight of your moral
excellence on our side.

johan (aside, to bernick): karsten, we will have a talk about this
tomorrow. (goes out through the garden. bernick, looking half dazed,
goes out to the right with sandstad.)




act iii


(scene--the same room. bernick, with a cane in his hand and evidently
in a great rage, comes out of the farther room on the left, leaving the
door half-open behind him.)

bernick (speaking to his wife, who is in the other room): there! i have
given it him in earnest now; i don't think he will forget that
thrashing! what do you say?--and i say that you are an injudicious
mother! you make excuses for him, and countenance any sort of rascality
on his part--not rascality? what do you call it, then? slipping out of
the house at night, going out in a fishing boat, staying away till well
on in the day, and giving me such a horrible fright when i have so much
to worry me! and then the young scamp has the audacity to threaten that
he will run away! just let him try it!--you? no, very likely; you don't
trouble yourself much about what happens to him. i really believe that
if he were to get killed--! oh, really? well, i have work to leave
behind me in the world; i have no fancy for being left childless--now,
do not raise objections, betty; it shall be as i say--he is confined to
the house. (listens.) hush; do not let any one notice anything. (krap
comes in from the right.)

krap: can you spare me a moment, mr. bernick?

bernick (throwing away the cane): certainly, certainly. have you come
from the yard?

krap: yes. ahem--!

bernick: well? nothing wrong with the "palm tree," i hope?

krap: the "palm tree" can sail tomorrow, but

bernick: it is the "indian girl," then? i had a suspicion that that
obstinate fellow--

krap: the "indian girl" can sail tomorrow, too; but i am sure she will
not get very far.

bernick: what do you mean?

krap: excuse me, sir; that door is standing ajar, and i think there is
some one in the other room--

bernick (shutting the door): there, then! but what is this that no one
else must hear?

krap: just this--that i believe aune intends to let the "indian girl"
go to the bottom with every mother's son on board.

bernick: good god!--what makes you think that?

krap: i cannot account for it any other way, sir.

bernick: well, tell me as briefly as you can

krap: i will. you know yourself how slowly the work has gone on in the
yard since we got the new machines and the new inexperienced hands?

bernick: yes, yes.

krap: but this morning, when i went down there, i noticed that the
repairs to the american boat had made extraordinary progress; the great
hole in the bottom--the rotten patch, you know--

bernick: yes, yes--what about it?

krap: was completely repaired--to all appearance at any rate, covered
up--looked as good as new. i heard that aune himself had been working
at it by lantern light the whole night.

bernick: yes, yes--well?

krap: i turned it over in my head for a bit; the hands were away at
their breakfast, so i found an opportunity to have a look around the
boat, both outside and in, without anyone seeing me. i had a job to get
down to the bottom through the cargo, but i learned the truth. there is
something very suspicious going on, mr. bernick.

bernick: i cannot believe it, krap. i cannot and will not believe such
a thing of aune.

krap: i am very sorry--but it is the simple truth. something very
suspicious is going on. no new timbers put in, as far as i could see,
only stopped up and tinkered at, and covered over with sailcloth and
tarpaulins and that sort of thing--an absolute fraud. the "indian girl"
will never get to new york; she will go to the bottom like a cracked
pot.

bernick: this is most horrible! but what can be his object, do you
suppose?

krap: probably he wants to bring the machines into discredit--wants to
take his revenge--wants to force you to take the old hands on again.

bernick: and to do this he is willing to sacrifice the lives of all on
board.

krap: he said the other day that there were no men on board the "indian
girl"--only wild beasts.

bernick: yes, but--apart from that--has he no regard for the great loss
of capital it would mean?

krap: aune does not look upon capital with a very friendly eye, mr.
bernick.

bernick: that is perfectly true; he is an agitator and a fomenter of
discontent; but such an unscrupulous thing as this--look here, krap;
you must look into the matter once more. not a word of it to any one.
the blame will fall on our yard if any one hears anything of it.

krap: of course, but--

bernick: when the hands are away at their dinner you must manage to get
down there again; i must have absolute certainty about it.

krap: you shall, sir; but, excuse me, what do you propose to do?

bernick: report the affair, naturally. we cannot, of course, let
ourselves become accomplices in such a crime. i could not have such a
thing on my conscience. moreover, it will make a good impression, both
on the press and on the public in general, if it is seen that i set all
personal interests aside and let justice take its course.

krap: quite true, mr. bernick.

bernick: but first of all i must be absolutely certain. and meanwhile,
do not breathe a word of it.

krap: not a word, sir. and you shall have your certainty. (goes out
through the garden and down the street.)

bernick (half aloud): shocking!--but no, it is impossible!
inconceivable!

(as he turns to go into his room, hilmar comes in from the right.)

hilmar: good morning, karsten. let me congratulate you on your triumph
at the commercial association yesterday.

bernick: thank you.

hilmar: it was a brilliant triumph, i hear; the triumph of intelligent
public spirit over selfishness and prejudice--something like a raid of
french troops on the kabyles. it is astonishing that after that
unpleasant scene here, you could--

bernick: yes, yes--quite so.

hilmar: but the decisive battle has not been fought yet.

bernick: in the matter of the railway, do you mean?

hilmar: yes; i suppose you know the trouble that hammer is brewing?

bernick (anxiously): no, what is that?

hilmar: oh, he is greatly taken up with the rumour that is going
around, and is preparing to dish up an article about it.

bernick: what rumour?

hilmar: about the extensive purchase of property along the branch line,
of course.

bernick: what? is there such a rumour as that going about?

hilmar: it is all over the town. i heard it at the club when i looked
in there. they say that one of our lawyers has quietly bought up, on
commission, all the forest land, all the mining land, all the
waterfalls--

bernick: don't they say whom it was for?

hilmar: at the club they thought it must be for some company, not
connected with this town, that has got a hint of the scheme you have in
hand, and has made haste to buy before the price of these properties
went up. isn't it villainous?--ugh!

bernick: villainous?

hilmar: yes, to have strangers putting their fingers into our pie--and
one of our own local lawyers lending himself to such a thing! and now
it will be outsiders that will get all the profits!

bernick: but, after all, it is only an idle rumour.

hilmar: meanwhile people are believing it, and tomorrow or the next
day, i have no doubt hammer will nail it to the counter as a fact.
there is a general sense of exasperation in the town already. i heard
several people say that if the rumour were confirmed they would take
their names off the subscription lists.

bernick: impossible!

hilmar: is it? why do you suppose these mercenary-minded creatures were
so willing to go into the undertaking with you? don't you suppose they
have scented profit for themselves--

bernick: it is impossible, i am sure; there is so much public spirit in
our little community--

hilmar: in our community? of course you are a confirmed optimist, and
so you judge others by yourself. but i, who am a tolerably experienced
observer--! there isn't a single soul in the place--excepting
ourselves, of course--not a single soul in the place who holds up the
banner of the ideal. (goes towards the verandah.) ugh, i can see them
there--

bernick: see whom?

hilmar: our two friends from america. (looks out to the right.) and who
is that they are walking with? as i am alive, if it is not the captain
of the "indian girl." ugh!

bernick: what can they want with him?

hilmar. oh, he is just the right company for them. he looks as if he
had been a slave-dealer or a pirate; and who knows what the other two
may have been doing all these years.

bernick: let me tell you that it is grossly unjust to think such things
about them.

hilmar: yes--you are an optimist. but here they are, bearing down upon
us again; so i will get away while there is time. (goes towards the
door on the left. lona comes in from the right.)

lona: oh, hilmar, am i driving you away?

hilmar: not at all; i am in rather a hurry; i want to have a word with
betty. (goes into the farthest room on the left.)

bernick (after a moment's silence): well, lona?

lona: yes?

bernick: what do you think of me today?

lona: the same as i did yesterday. a lie more or less--

bernick: i must enlighten you about it. where has johan gone?

lona: he is coming; he had to see a man first.

bernick: after what you heard yesterday, you will understand that my
whole life will be ruined if the truth comes to light.

lona: i can understand that.

bernick: of course, it stands to reason that i was not guilty of the
crime there was so much talk about here.

lona: that stands to reason. but who was the thief?

bernick: there was no thief. there was no money stolen--not a penny.

lona: how is that?

bernick: not a penny, i tell you.

lona: but those rumours? how did that shameful rumour get about that
johan--

bernick: lona, i think i can speak to you as i could to no one else. i
will conceal nothing from you. i was partly to blame for spreading the
rumour.

lona: you? you could act in that way towards a man who for your sake--!

bernick: do not condemn me without bearing in mind how things stood at
that time. i told you about it yesterday. i came home and found my
mother involved in a mesh of injudicious undertakings; we had all
manner of bad luck--it seemed as if misfortunes were raining upon us,
and our house was on the verge of ruin. i was half reckless and half in
despair. lona, i believe it was mainly to deaden my thoughts that i let
myself drift into that entanglement that ended in johan's going away.

lona: hm--

bernick: you can well imagine how every kind of rumour was set on foot
after you and he had gone. people began to say that it was not his
first piece of folly--that dorf had received a large sum of money to
hold his tongue and go away; other people said that she had received
it. at the same time it was obvious that our house was finding it
difficult to meet its obligations. what was more natural than that
scandal-mongers should find some connection between these two rumours?
and as the woman remained here, living in poverty, people declared that
he had taken the money with him to america; and every time rumour
mentioned the sum, it grew larger.

lona: and you, karsten--?

bernick: i grasped at the rumour like a drowning man at a straw.

lona: you helped to spread it?

bernick: i did not contradict it. our creditors had begun to be
pressing, and i had the task of keeping them quiet. the result was the
dissipating of any suspicion as to the stability of the firm; people
said that we had been hit by a temporary piece of ill-luck--that all
that was necessary was that they should not press us--only give us time
and every creditor would be paid in full.

lona: and every creditor was paid in full?

bernick: yes, lona, that rumour saved our house and made me the man i
now am.

lona: that is to say, a lie has made you the man you now are.

bernick: whom did it injure at the time? it was johan's intention never
to come back.

lona: you ask whom it injured. look into your own heart, and tell me if
it has not injured you.

bernick: look into any man's heart you please, and you will always
find, in every one, at least one black spot which he has to keep
concealed.

lona: and you call yourselves pillars of society!

bernick: society has none better.

lona: and of what consequence is it whether such a society be propped
up or not? what does it all consist of? show and lies--and nothing
else. here are you, the first man in the town, living in grandeur and
luxury, powerful and respected--you, who have branded an innocent man
as a criminal.

bernick: do you suppose i am not deeply conscious of the wrong i have
done him? and do you suppose i am not ready to make amends to him for
it?

lona: how? by speaking out?

bernick: would you have the heart to insist on that?

lona: what else can make amends for such a wrong?

bernick: i am rich, lona; johan can demand any sum he pleases.

lona: yes, offer him money, and you will hear what he will say.

bernick: do you know what he intends to do?

lona: no; since yesterday he has been dumb. he looks as if this had
made a grown man of him all at once.

bernick: i must talk to him.

lona: here he comes. (johan comes in from the right.)

bernick (going towards hint): johan--!

johan (motioning him away): listen to me first. yesterday morning i
gave you my word that i would hold my tongue.

bernick: you did.

johan: but then i did not know--

bernick: johan, only let me say a word or two to explain the
circumstances--

johan: it is unnecessary; i understand the circumstances perfectly. the
firm was in a dangerous position at the time; i had gone off, and you
had my defenceless name and reputation at your mercy. well, i do not
blame you so very much for what you did; we were young and thoughtless
in those days. but now i have need of the truth, and now you must speak.

bernick: and just now i have need of all my reputation for morality,
and therefore i cannot speak.

johan: i don't take much account of the false reports you spread about
me; it is the other thing that you must take the blame of. i shall make
dina my wife, and here--here in your town--i mean to settle down and
live with her.

lona: is that what you mean to do?

bernick: with dina? dina as your wife?--in this town?

johan: yes, here and nowhere else. i mean to stay here to defy all
these liars and slanderers. but before i can win her, you must
exonerate me.

bernick: have you considered that, if i confess to the one thing, it
will inevitably mean making myself responsible for the other as well?
you will say that i can show by our books that nothing dishonest
happened? but i cannot; our books were not so accurately kept in those
days. and even if i could, what good would it do? should i not in any
case be pointed at as the man who had once saved himself by an untruth,
and for fifteen years had allowed that untruth and all its consequences
to stand without having raised a finger to demolish it? you do not know
our community very much, or you would realise that it would ruin me
utterly.

johan: i can only tell you that i mean to make mrs. dorf's daughter my
wife, and live with her in this town.

bernick (wiping the perspiration from his forehead): listen to me,
johan--and you too, lona. the circumstances i am in just now are quite
exceptional. i am situated in such a way that if you aim this blow at
me you will not only destroy me, but will also destroy a great future,
rich in blessings, that lies before the community which, after all, was
the home of your childhood.

johan: and if i do not aim this blow at you, i shall be destroying all
my future happiness with my own hand.

lona: go on, karsten.

bernick: i will tell you, then. it is mixed up with the railway
project, and the whole thing is not quite so simple as you think. i
suppose you have heard that last year there was some talk of a railway
line along the coast? many influential people backed up the
idea--people in the town and the suburbs, and especially the press; but
i managed to get the proposal quashed, on the ground that it would have
injured our steamboat trade along the coast.

lona: have you any interest in the steamboat trade?

bernick: yes. but no one ventured to suspect me on that account; my
honoured name fully protected me from that. for the matter of that, i
could have stood the loss; but the place could not have stood it. so
the inland line was decided upon. as soon as that was done, i assured
myself--without saying anything about it--that a branch line could be
laid to the town.

lona: why did you say nothing about it, karsten?

bernick: have you heard the rumours of extensive buying up of forest
lands, mines and waterfalls--?

johan: yes, apparently it is some company from another part of the
country.

bernick: as these properties are situated at present, they are as good
as valueless to their owners, who are scattered about the
neighbourhood; they have therefore been sold comparatively cheap. if
the purchaser had waited till the branch line began to be talked of,
the proprietors would have asked exorbitant prices.

lona: well--what then?

bernick: now i am going to tell you something that can be construed in
different ways--a thing to which, in our community, a man could only
confess provided he had an untarnished and honoured name to take his
stand upon.

lona: well?

bernick: it is i that have bought up the whole of them.

lona: you?

johan: on your own account?

bernick: on my own account. if the branch line becomes an accomplished
fact, i am a millionaire; if it does not, i am ruined.

lona: it is a big risk, karsten.

bernick: i have risked my whole fortune on it.

lona: i am not thinking of your fortune; but if it comes to light that--

bernick. yes, that is the critical part of it. with the unblemished and
honoured name i have hitherto borne, i can take the whole thing upon my
shoulders, carry it through, and say to my fellow-citizens: "see, i
have taken this risk for the good of the community."

lona: of the community?

bernick: yes; and not a soul will doubt my motives.

lona: then some of those concerned in it have acted more
openly--without any secret motives or considerations.

bernick: who?

lona: why, of course, rummel and sandstad and vigeland.

bernick: to get them on my side i was obliged to let them into the
secret.

lona: and they?

bernick: they have stipulated for a fifth part of the profits as their
share.

lona: oh, these pillars of society.

bernick: and isn't it society itself that forces us to use these
underhanded means? what would have happened if i had not acted
secretly? everybody would have wanted to have a hand in the
undertaking; the whole thing would have been divided up, mismanaged and
bungled. there is not a single man in the town except myself who is
capable of directing so big an affair as this will be. in this country,
almost without exception, it is only foreigners who have settled here
who have the aptitude for big business schemes. that is the reason why
my conscience acquits me in the matter. it is only in my hands that
these properties can become a real blessing to the many who have to
make their daily bread.

lona: i believe you are right there, karsten.

johan: but i have no concern with the many, and my life's happiness is
at stake.

bernick: the welfare of your native place is also at stake. if things
come out which cast reflections on my earlier conduct, then all my
opponents will fall upon me with united vigour. a youthful folly is
never allowed to be forgotten in our community. they would go through
the whole of my previous life, bring up a thousand little incidents in
it, interpret and explain them in the light of what has been revealed;
they would crush me under the weight of rumours and slanders. i should
be obliged to abandon the railway scheme; and, if i take my hand off
that, it will come to nothing, and i shall be ruined and my life as a
citizen will be over.

lona: johan, after what we have just heard, you must go away from here
and hold your tongue.

bernick: yes, yes, johan--you must!

johan: yes, i will go away, and i will hold my tongue; but i shall come
back, and then i shall speak.

bernick: stay over there, johan; hold your tongue, and i am willing to
share with you--

johan: keep your money, but give me back my name and reputation.

bernick: and sacrifice my own!

johan: you and your community must get out of that the best way you
can. i must and shall win dina for my wife. and therefore, i am going
to sail tomorrow in the "indian girl"--

bernick: in the "indian girl"?

johan: yes. the captain has promised to take me. i shall go over to
america, as i say; i shall sell my farm, and set my affairs in order.
in two months i shall be back.

bernick: and then you will speak?

johan: then the guilty man must take his guilt on himself.

bernick: have you forgotten that, if i do that, i must also take on
myself guilt that is not mine?

johan: who is it that for the last fifteen years has benefited by that
shameful rumour?

bernick: you will drive me to desperation! well, if you speak, i shall
deny everything! i shall say it is a plot against me--that you have
come here to blackmail me!

lona: for shame, karsten!

bernick: i am a desperate man, i tell you, and i shall fight for my
life. i shall deny everything--everything!

johan: i have your two letters. i found them in my box among my other
papers. this morning i read them again; they are plain enough.

bernick: and will you make them public?

johan: if it becomes necessary.

bernick: and you will be back here in two months?

johan: i hope so. the wind is fair. in three weeks i shall be in new
york--if the "indian girl" does not go to the bottom.

bernick (with a start): go to the bottom? why should the "indian girl"
go to the bottom?

johan: quite so--why should she?

bernick (scarcely audibly): go to the bottom?

johan: well, karsten, now you know what is before you. you must find
your own way out. good-bye! you can say good-bye to betty for me,
although she has not treated me like a sister. but i must see martha.
she shall tell dina---; she shall promise me--(goes out through the
farther door on the left.)

bernick (to himself): the "indian girl"--? (quickly.)  lona, you must
prevent that!

lona: you see for yourself, karsten--i have no influence over him any
longer. (follows johan into the other room.)

bernick (a prey to uneasy thoughts): go to the bottom--?

(aune comes in from the right.)

aune: excuse me, sir, but if it is convenient--

bernick (turning round angrily): what do you want?

aune: to know if i may ask you a question, sir.

bernick: be quick about it, then. what is it?

aune: i wanted to ask if i am to consider it as certain--absolutely
certain--that i should be dismissed from the yard if the "indian girl"
were not ready to sail tomorrow?

bernick: what do you mean? the ship is ready to sail?

aune: yes--it is. but suppose it were not, should i be discharged?

bernick: what is the use of asking such idle questions?

aune: only that i should like to know, sir. will you answer me
that?--should i be discharged?

bernick: am i in the habit of keeping my word or not?

aune: then tomorrow i should have lost the position i hold in my house
and among those near and dear to me--lost my influence over men of my
own class--lost all opportunity of doing anything for the cause of the
poorer and needier members of the community?

bernick: aune, we have discussed all that before.

aune: quite so--then the "indian girl" will sail.

(a short silence.)

bernick: look here--it is impossible for me to have my eyes
everywhere--i cannot be answerable for everything. you can give me your
assurance, i suppose, that the repairs have been satisfactorily carried
out?

aune: you gave me very short grace, mr. bernick.

bernick: but i understand you to warrant the repairs?

aune: the weather is fine, and it is summer.

(another pause.)

bernick: have you anything else to say to me?

aune: i think not, sir.

bernick: then--the "indian girl" will sail...

aune: tomorrow?

bernick: yes.

aune: very good. (bows and goes out. bernick stands for a moment
irresolute; then walks quickly towards the door, as if to call aune
back; but stops, hesitatingly, with his hand on the door-handle. at
that moment the door is opened from without, and krap comes in.)

krap (in a low voice): aha, he has been here. has he confessed?

bernick: hm--; have you discovered anything?

krap: what need of that, sir? could you not see the evil conscience
looking out of the man's eyes?

bernick: nonsense--such things don't show. have you discovered
anything, i want to know?

krap: i could not manage it; i was too late. they had already begun
hauling the ship out of the dock. but their very haste in doing that
plainly shows that--

bernick: it shows nothing. has the inspection taken place, then?

krap: of course; but--

bernick: there, you see! and of course they found nothing to complain
of?

krap: mr. bernick, you know very well how much this inspection means,
especially in a yard that has such a good name as ours has.

bernick: no matter--it takes all responsibility off us.

krap: but, sir, could you really not tell from aune's manner that--?

bernick: aune has completely reassured me, let me tell you.

krap: and let me tell you, sir, that i am morally certain that--

bernick: what does this mean, krap? i see plainly enough that you want
to get your knife into this man; but if you want to attack him, you
must find some other occasion. you know how important it is to me--or,
i should say, to the owners--that the "indian girl" should sail
to-morrow.

krap: very well--so be it; but if ever we hear of that ship again--hm!

(vigeland comes in from the right.)

vigeland: i wish you a very good morning, mr. bernick. have you a
moment to spare?

bernick: at your service, mr. vigeland.

vigeland: i only want to know if you are also of opinion that the "palm
tree" should sail tomorrow?

bernick: certainly; i thought that was quite settled.

vigeland: well, the captain came to me just now and told me that storm
signals have been hoisted.

bernick: oh! are we to expect a storm?

vigeland: a stiff breeze, at all events; but not a contrary wind--just
the opposite.

bernick: hm--well, what do you say?

vigeland: i say, as i said to the captain, that the "palm tree" is in
the hands of providence. besides, they are only going across the north
sea at first; and in england, freights are running tolerably high just
now, so that--

bernick: yes, it would probably mean a loss for us if we waited.

vigeland: besides, she is a stout ship, and fully insured as well. it
is more risky, now, for the "indian girl"--

bernick: what do you mean?

vigeland: she sails tomorrow, too.

bernick: yes, the owners have been in such a hurry, and, besides--

vigeland:  well, if that old hulk can venture out--and with such a
crew, into the bargain--it would be a disgrace to us if we--

bernick: quite so. i presume you have the ship's papers with you.

vigeland: yes, here they are.

bernick: good; then will you go in with mr. krap?

krap: will you come in here, sir, and we will dispose of them at once.

vigeland: thank you.--and the issue we leave in the hands of the
almighty, mr. bernick. (goes with krap into bernick's room. rorlund
comes up from the garden.)

rorlund:  at home at this time of day, mr. bernick?

bernick (lost in thought): as you see.

rorlund: it was really on your wife's account i came. i thought she
might be in need of a word of comfort.

bernick: very likely she is. but i want to have a little talk with you,
too.

rorlund: with the greatest of pleasure, mr. bernick. but what is the
matter with you? you look quite pale and upset.

bernick: really? do i? well, what else could you expect--a man so
loaded with responsibilities as i am? there is all my own big
business--and now the planning of this railway.--but tell me something,
mr. rorlund, let me put a question to you.

rorlund: with pleasure, mr. bernick.

bernick: it is about a thought that has occurred to me. suppose a man
is face to face with an undertaking which will concern the welfare of
thousands, and suppose it should be necessary to make a sacrifice of
one--?

rorlund: what do you mean?

bernick: for example, suppose a man were thinking of starting a large
factory. he knows for certain--because all his experience has taught
him so--that sooner or later a toll of human life will be exacted in
the working of that factory.

rorlund: yes, that is only too probable.

bernick: or, say a man embarks on a mining enterprise. he takes into
his service fathers of families and young men in the first flush of
their youth. is it not quite safe to predict that all of them will not
come out of it alive?

rorlund: yes, unhappily that is quite true.

bernick: well--a man in that position will know beforehand that the
undertaking he proposes to start must undoubtedly, at some time or
other, mean a loss of human life. but the undertaking itself is for the
public good; for every man's life that it costs, it will undoubtedly
promote the welfare of many hundreds.

rorlund: ah, you are thinking of the railway--of all the dangerous
excavating and blasting, and that sort of thing--

bernick: yes--quite so--i am thinking of the railway. and, besides, the
coming of the railway will mean the starting of factories and mines.
but do not think, nevertheless--

rorlund: my dear mr. bernick, you are almost over-conscientious. what i
think is that, if you place the affair in the hands of providence--

bernick: yes--exactly; providence--

rorlund: you are blameless in the matter. go on and build your railway
hopefully.

bernick: yes, but now i will put a special instance to you. suppose a
charge of blasting-powder had to be exploded in a dangerous place, and
that unless it were exploded the line could not be constructed? suppose
the engineer knew that it would cost the life of the workman who lit
the fuse, but that it had to be lit, and that it was the engineer's
duty to send a workman to do it?

rorlund: hm--

bernick: i know what you will say. it would be a splendid thing if the
engineer took the match himself and went and lit the fuse. but that is
out of the question, so he must sacrifice a workman.

rorlund: that is a thing no engineer here would ever do.

bernick: no engineer in the bigger countries would think twice about
doing it.

rorlund: in the bigger countries? no, i can quite believe it. in those
depraved and unprincipled communities.

bernick: oh, there is a good deal to be said for those communities.

rorlund: can you say that?--you, who yourself--

bernick: in the bigger communities a man finds space to carry out a
valuable project--finds the courage to make some sacrifice in a great
cause; but here, a man is cramped by all kinds of petty considerations
and scruples.

rorlund: is human life a petty consideration?

bernick: when that human life threatens the welfare of thousands.

rorlund: but you are suggesting cases that are quite inconceivable, mr.
bernick! i do not understand you at all today. and you quote the bigger
countries--well, what do they think of human life there? they look upon
it simply as part of the capital they have to use. but we look at
things from a somewhat different moral standpoint, i should hope. look
at our respected shipping industry! can you name a single one of our
ship-owners who would sacrifice a human life for the sake of paltry
gain? and then think of those scoundrels in the bigger countries, who
for the sake of profit send out freights in one unseaworthy ship after
another--

bernick: i am not talking of unseaworthy ships!

rorlund: but i am, mr. bernick.

bernick: yes, but to what purpose? they have nothing to do with the
question--oh, these small, timid considerations! if a general from this
country were to take his men under fire and some of them were shot, i
suppose he would have sleepless nights after it! it is not so in other
countries. you should bear what that fellow in there says--

rorlund: he? who? the american--?

bernick: yes. you should hear how in america--

rorlund: he, in there? and you did not tell me? i shall at once--

bernick: it is no use; you won't be able to do anything with him.

rorlund: we shall see. ah, here he comes. (johan comes in from the
other room.)

johan (talking back through the open door): yes, yes, dina--as you
please; but i do not mean to give you up, all the same. i shall come
back, and then everything will come right between us.

rorlund: excuse me, but what did you mean by that? what is it you
propose to do?

johan: i propose that that young girl, before whom you blackened my
character yesterday, shall become my wife.

rorlund: your wife? and can you really suppose that--?

johan: i mean to marry her.

rorlund: well, then you shall know the truth. (goes to the half-open
door.) mrs. bernick, will you be so kind as to come and be a
witness--and you too, miss martha. and let dina come. (sees lona at the
door.) ah, you here too?

lona: shall i come too?

rorlund: as many as you please--the more the better.

bernick: what are you going to do? (lona, mrs. bernick, martha, dina
and hilmar come in from the other room.)

mrs. bernick: mr. rorlund, i have tried my hardest, but i cannot
prevent him...

rorlund: i shall prevent him, mrs. bernick. dina, you are a thoughtless
girl, but i do not blame you so greatly. you have too long lacked the
necessary moral support that should have sustained you. i blame myself
for not having afforded you that support.

dina: you mustn't speak now!

mrs. bernick: what is it?

rorlund: it is now that i must speak, dina, although your conduct
yesterday and today has made it ten times more difficult for me. but
all other considerations must give way to the necessity for saving you.
you remember that i gave you my word; you remember what you promised
you would answer when i judged that the right time had come. now i dare
not hesitate any longer, and therefore--. (turns to johan.) this young
girl, whom you are persecuting, is my betrothed.

mrs. bernick: what?

bernick: dina!

johan: she? your--?

martha: no, no, dina!

lona: it is a lie!

johan: dina--is this man speaking the truth?

dina (after a short pause): yes.

rorlund: i hope this has rendered all your arts of seduction powerless.
the step i have determined to take for dina's good, i now wish openly
proclaimed to every one. i cherish the certain hope that it will not be
misinterpreted. and now, mrs. bernick, i think it will be best for us
to take her away from here, and try to bring back peace and
tranquillity to her mind.

mrs. bernick: yes, come with me. oh, dina--what a lucky girl you are!
(takes dina out to the left; rorlund follows them.)

martha: good-bye, johan! (goes out.)

hilmar (at the verandah door): hm--i really must say...

lona (who has followed dina with her eyes, to johan): don't be
downhearted, my boy! i shall stay here and keep my eye on the parson.
(goes out to the right.)

bernick: johan, you won't sail in the "indian girl" now?

johan: indeed i shall.

bernick: but you won't come back?

johan: i am coming back.

bernick: after this? what have you to do here after this?

johan: revenge myself on you all; crush as many of you as i can. (goes
out to the right. vigeland and krap come in from bernick's room.)

vigeland: there, now the papers are in order, mr. bernick.

bernick: good, good.

krap (in a low voice): and i suppose it is settled that the "indian
girl" is to sail tomorrow?

bernick: yes. (goes into his room. vigeland and krap go out to the
right. hilmar is just going after them, when olaf puts his head
carefully out of the door on the left.)

olaf: uncle! uncle hilmar!

hilmar: ugh, is it you? why don't you stay upstairs? you know you are
confined to the house.

olaf (coming a step or two nearer): hush! uncle hilmar, have you heard
the news?

hilmar: yes, i have heard that you got a thrashing today.

olaf (looking threateningly towards his father's room): he shan't
thrash me any more. but have you heard that uncle johan is going to
sail tomorrow with the americans?

hilmar: what has that got to do with you? you had better run upstairs
again.

olaf: perhaps i shall be going for a buffalo hunt, too, one of these
days, uncle.

hilmar: rubbish! a coward like you--

olaf: yes--just you wait! you will learn something tomorrow!

hilmar: duffer! (goes out through the garden. olaf runs into the room
again and shuts the door, as he sees krap coming in from the right.)

krap (going to the door of bernick's room and opening it slightly):
excuse my bothering you again, mr. bernick; but there is a tremendous
storm blowing up. (waits a moment, but there is no answer.) is the
"indian girl" to sail, for all that? (after a short pause, the
following answer is heard.)

bernick (from his room): the "indian girl" is to sail, for all that.

(krap shuts the door and goes out again to the right.)




act iv


(scene--the same room. the work-table has been taken away. it is a
stormy evening and already dusk. darkness sets in as the following
scene is in progress. a man-servant is lighting the chandelier; two
maids bring in pots of flowers, lamps and candles, which they place on
tables and stands along the walls. rummel, in dress clothes, with
gloves and a white tie, is standing in the room giving instructions to
the servants.)

rummel: only every other candle, jacob. it must not look as if it were
arranged for the occasion--it has to come as a surprise, you know. and
all these flowers--? oh, well, let them be; it will probably look as if
they stood there everyday. (bernick comes out of his room.)

bernick (stopping at the door): what does this mean?

rummel: oh dear, is it you? (to the servants.) yes, you might leave us
for the present. (the servants go out.)

bernick: but, rummel, what is the meaning of this?

rummel: it means that the proudest moment of your life has come. a
procession of his fellow citizens is coming to do honour to the first
man of the town.

bernick: what!

rummel: in procession--with banners and a band! we ought to have had
torches too; but we did not like to risk that in this stormy weather.
there will be illuminations--and that always sounds well in the
newspapers.

bernick: listen, rummel--i won't have anything to do with this.

rummel: but it is too late now; they will be here in half-an-hour.

bernick: but why did you not tell me about this before?

rummel: just because i was afraid you would raise objections to it. but
i consulted your wife; she allowed me to take charge of the
arrangements, while she looks after the refreshments.

bernick (listening): what is that noise? are they coming already? i
fancy i hear singing.

rummel (going to the verandah door): singing? oh, that is only the
americans. the "indian girl" is being towed out.

bernick: towed out? oh, yes. no, rummel, i cannot this evening; i am
not well.

rummel: you certainly do look bad. but you must pull yourself together;
devil take it--you must! sandstad and vigeland and i all attach the
greatest importance to carrying this thing through. we have got to
crush our opponents under the weight of as complete an expression of
public opinion as possible. rumours are getting about the town; our
announcement about the purchase of the property cannot be withheld any
longer. it is imperative that this very evening--after songs and
speeches, amidst the clink of glasses--in a word, in an ebullient
atmosphere of festivity--you should inform them of the risk you have
incurred for the good of the community. in such an ebullient atmosphere
of festivity--as i just now described it--you can do an astonishing lot
with the people here. but you must have that atmosphere, or the thing
won't go.

bernick: yes, yes.

rummel: and especially when so delicate and ticklish a point has to be
negotiated. well, thank goodness, you have a name that will be a tower
of strength, bernick. but listen now; we must make our arrangements, to
some extent. mr. hilmar tonnesen has written an ode to you. it begins
very charmingly with the words: "raise the ideal's banner high!" and
mr. rorlund has undertaken the task of making the speech of the
evening. of course you must reply to that.

bernick: i cannot tonight, rummel. couldn't you--?

rummel: it is impossible, however willing i might be; because, as you
can imagine, his speech will be especially addressed to you. of course
it is possible he may say a word or two about the rest of us; i have
spoken to vigeland and sandstad about it. our idea is that, in
replying, you should propose the toast of "prosperity to our
community"; sandstad will say a few words on the subject of harmonious
relations between the different strata of society; then vigeland will
express the hope that this new undertaking may not disturb the sound
moral basis upon which our community stands; and i propose, in a few
suitable words, to refer to the ladies, whose work for the community,
though more inconspicuous, is far from being without its importance.
but you are not listening to me.

bernick: yes--indeed i am. but, tell me, do you think there is a very
heavy sea running outside?

rummel: why, are you nervous about the "palm tree"? she is fully
insured, you know.

bernick: yes, she is insured; but--

rummel: and in good repair--and that is the main thing.

bernick: hm--. supposing anything does happen to a ship, it doesn't
follow that human life will be in danger, does it? the ship and the
cargo may be lost--and one might lose one's boxes and papers--

rummel: good lord--boxes and papers are not of much consequence.

bernick: not of much consequence! no, no; i only meant--. hush--i hear
voices again.

rummel: it is on board the "palm tree."

(vigeland comes in from the right.)

vigeland: yes, they are just towing the "palm tree" out. good evening,
mr. bernick.

bernick: and you, as a seafaring man, are still of opinion that--

vigeland: i put my trust in providence, mr. bernick. moreover, i have
been on board myself and distributed a few small tracts which i hope
may carry a blessing with them.

(sandstad and krap come in from the right.)

sandstad (to some one at the door): well, if that gets through all
right, anything will. (comes in.) ah, good evening, good evening!

bernick: is anything the matter, krap?

krap: i say nothing, mr. bernick.

sandstad: the entire crew of the "indian girl" are drunk; i will stake
my reputation on it that they won't come out of it alive. (lona comes
in from the right.)

lona: ah, now i can say his good-byes for him.

bernick: is he on board already?

lona: he will be directly, at any rate. we parted outside the hotel.

bernick: and he persists in his intention?

lona: as firm as a rock.

rummel (who is fumbling at the window): confound these new-fangled
contrivances; i cannot get the curtains drawn.

lona: do you want them drawn? i thought, on the contrary--

rummel: yes, drawn at first, miss hessel. you know what is in the wind,
i suppose?

lona: yes. let me help you. (takes hold of the cords.) i will draw down
the curtains on my brother-in-law--though i would much rather draw them
up.

rummel:  you can do that too, later on. when the garden is filled with
a surging crowd, then the curtains shall be drawn back, and they will
be able to look in upon a surprised and happy family. citizens' lives
should be such that they can live in glass houses! (bernick opens his
mouth, as though he were going to say something; but he turns hurriedly
away and goes into his room.)

rummel: come along, let us have a final consultation. come in, too, mr.
krap; you must assist us with information on one or two points of
detail. (all the men go into bernick's room. lona has drawn the
curtains over the windows, and is just going to do the same over the
open glass door, when olaf jumps down from the room above on to the
garden steps; he has a wrap over his shoulders and a bundle in his
hand.)

lona: bless me, child, how you frightened me!

olaf (hiding his bundle): hush, aunt!

lona: did you jump out of the window? where are you going?

olaf: hush!--don't say anything. i want to go to uncle johan--only on
to the quay, you know--only to say goodbye to him. good-night, aunt!
(runs out through the garden.)

lona: no--stop! olaf--olaf!

(johan, dressed for his journey, with a bag over his shoulder, comes
warily in by the door on the right.)

johan: lona!

lona (turning round): what! back again?

johan: i have still a few minutes. i must see her once more; we cannot
part like this. (the farther door on the left opens, and martha and
dina, both with cloaks on, and the latter carrying a small travelling
bag in her hand, come in.)

dina: let me go to him! let me go to him!

martha: yes, you shall go to him, dina!

dina: there he is!

johan: dina!

dina: take me with you!

johan: what--!

lona: you mean it?

dina: yes, take me with you. the other has written to me that he means
to announce to everyone this evening.

johan: dina--you do not love him?

dina: i have never loved the man! i would rather drown myself in the
fjord than be engaged to him! oh, how he humiliated me yesterday with
his condescending manner! how clear he made it that he felt he was
lifting up a poor despised creature to his own level! i do not mean to
be despised any longer. i mean to go away. may i go with you?

johan: yes, yes--a thousand times, yes!

dina: i will not be a burden to you long. only help me to get over
there; help me to go the right way about things at first.

johan: hurrah, it is all right after all, dina!

lona (pointing to bernick's door): hush!--gently, gently!

johan: dina, i shall look after you.

dina: i am not going to let you do that. i mean to look after myself;
over there, i am sure i can do that. only let me get away from here.
oh, these women!--you don't know--they have written to me today,
too--exhorting me to realise my good fortune--impressing on me how
magnanimous he has been. tomorrow, and every day afterwards, they would
be watching me to see if i were making myself worthy of it all. i am
sick and tired of all this goodness!

johan: tell me, dina--is that the only reason you are coming away? am i
nothing to you?

dina: yes, johan, you are more to me than any one else in the world.

johan: oh, dina--!

dina: every one here tells me i ought to hate and detest you--that it
is my duty; but i cannot see that it is my duty, and shall never be
able to.

lona: no more you shall, my dear!

martha: no, indeed you shall not; and that is why you shall go with him
as his wife.

johan: yes, yes!

lona: what? give me a kiss, martha. i never expected that from you!

martha: no, i dare say not; i would not have expected it myself. but i
was bound to break out some time! ah, what we suffer under the tyranny
of habit and custom! make a stand against that, dina. be his wife. let
me see you defy all this convention.

johan: what is your answer, dina?

dina: yes, i will be your wife.

johan: dina!

dina: but first of all i want to work--to make something of myself--as
you have done. i am not going to be merely a thing that is taken.

lona: quite right--that is the way.

johan: very well; i shall wait and hope--

lona: and win, my boy! but now you must get on board!

johan: yes, on board! ah, lona, my dear sister, just one word with you.
look here-- (he takes her into the background and talks hurriedly to
her.)

martha: dina, you lucky girl, let me look at you, and kiss you once
more--for the last time.

dina: not for the last time; no, my darling aunt, we shall meet again.

martha: never! promise me, dina, never to come back! (grasps her hands
and looks at her.) now go to your happiness, my dear child--across the
sea. how often, in my schoolroom, i have yearned to be over there! it
must be beautiful; the skies are loftier than here--a freer air plays
about your head--

dina: oh, aunt martha, some day you will follow us.

martha: i? never--never. i have my little vocation here, and now i
really believe i can live to the full the life that i ought.

dina: i cannot imagine being parted from you.

martha: ah, one can part from much, dina. (kisses her.) but i hope you
may never experience that, my sweet child. promise me to make him happy.

dina: i will promise nothing; i hate promises; things must happen as
they will.

martha: yes, yes, that is true; only remain what you are--true and
faithful to yourself.

dina: i will, aunt.

lona (putting into her pocket some papers that johan has given her):
splendid, splendid, my dear boy. but now you must be off.

johan: yes, we have no time to waste now. goodbye, lona, and thank you
for all your love. goodbye, martha, and thank you, too, for your loyal
friendship.

martha: goodbye, johan! goodbye, dina! and may you be happy all your
lives! (she and lona hurry them to the door at the back. johan and dina
go quickly down the steps and through the garden. lona shuts the door
and draws the curtains over it.)

lona: now we are alone, martha. you have lost her and i him.

martha: you--lost him?

lona: oh, i had already half lost him over there. the boy was longing
to stand on his own feet; that was why i pretended to be suffering from
homesickness.

martha: so that was it? ah, then i understand why you came. but he will
want you back, lona.

lona: an old step-sister--what use will he have for her now? men break
many very dear ties to win their happiness.

martha: that sometimes is so.

lona: but we two will stick together, martha.

martha: can i be anything to you?

lona: who more so? we two foster-sisters--haven't we both lost our
children? now we are alone.

martha: yes, alone. and therefore, you ought to know this too--i loved
him more than anything in the world.

lona: martha! (grasps her by the arm.) is that true?

martha: all my existence lies in those words. i have loved him and
waited for him. every summer i waited for him to come. and then he
came--but he had no eyes for me.

lona: you loved him! and it was you yourself that put his happiness
into his hands.

martha: ought i not to be the one to put his happiness into his hands,
since i loved him? yes, i have loved him. all my life has been for him,
ever since he went away. what reason had i to hope, you mean? oh, i
think i had some reason, all the same. but when he came back--then it
seemed as if everything had been wiped out of his memory. he had no
eyes for me.

lona: it was dina that overshadowed you, martha?

martha: and it is a good thing she did. at the time he went away, we
were of the same age; but when i saw him again--oh, that dreadful
moment!--i realised that now i was ten years older than he. he had gone
out into the bright sparkling sunshine, and breathed in youth and
health with every breath; and here i sat meanwhile, spinning and
spinning--

lona: spinning the thread of his happiness, martha.

martha: yes, it was a golden thread i spun. no bitterness! we have been
two good sisters to him, haven't we, lona?

lona (throwing her arms round her): martha!

(bernick comes in from his room.)

bernick (to the other men, who are in his room): yes, yes, arrange it
any way you please. when the time comes, i shall be able to--. (shuts
the door.) ah, you are here. look here, martha--i think you had better
change your dress; and tell betty to do the same. i don't want anything
elaborate, of course--something homely, but neat. but you must make
haste.

lona: and a bright, cheerful face, martha; your eyes must look happy.

bernick: olaf is to come downstairs too; i will have him beside me.

lona: hm! olaf.

martha: i will give betty your message. (goes out by the farther door
on the left.)

lona: well, the great and solemn moment is at hand.

bernick (walking uneasily up and down): yes, it is.

lona: at such a moment i should think a man would feel proud and happy.

bernick (looking at her): hm!

lona: i hear the whole town is to be illuminated.

bernick: yes, they have some idea of that sort.

lona: all the different clubs will assemble with their banners--your
name will blaze out in letters of fire--tonight the telegraph will
flash the news to every part of the country: "in the bosom of his happy
family, mr. bernick received the homage of his fellow citizens, as one
of the pillars of society."

bernick: that is so; and they will begin to cheer outside, and the
crowd will shout in front of my house until i shall be obliged to go
out and bow to them and thank them.

lona: obliged to?

bernick. do you suppose i shall feel happy at that moment?

lona: no, i don't suppose you will feel so very happy.

bernick: lona, you despise me.

lona: not yet.

bernick: and you have no right to; no right to despise me! lona, you
can have no idea how utterly alone i stand in this cramped and stunted
community--where i have had, year after year, to stifle my ambition for
a fuller life. my work may seem many-sided, but what have i really
accomplished? odds and ends--scraps. they would not stand anything else
here. if i were to go a step in advance of the opinions and views that
are current at the moment, i should lose all my influence. do you know
what we are--we who are looked upon as pillars of society? we are
nothing more, nor less, than the tools of society.

lona: why have you only begun to realise that now?

bernick: because i have been thinking a great deal lately--since you
came back--and this evening i have thought more seriously than ever
before. oh, lona, why did not i really know you then--in the old days,
i mean?

lona: and if you had?

bernick: i should never have let you go; and, if i had had you, i
should not be in the position i am in tonight.

lona: and do you never consider what she might have been to you--she
whom you chose in my place?

bernick: i know, at all events, that she has been nothing to me of what
i needed.

lona: because you have never shared your interests with her; because
you have never allowed her full and frank exchange of thoughts with
you; because you have allowed her to be borne under by self-reproach
for the shame you cast upon one who was dear to her.

bernick: yes, yes; it all comes from lying and deceit.

lona: then why not break with all this lying and deceit?

bernick: now? it is too late now, lona.

lona: karsten, tell me--what gratification does all this show and
deception bring you?

bernick: it brings me none. i must disappear someday, and all this
community of bunglers with me. but a generation is growing up that will
follow us; it is my son that i work for--i am providing a career for
him. there will come a time when truth will enter into the life of the
community, and on that foundation he shall build up a happier existence
than his father.

lona: with a lie at the bottom of it all? consider what sort of an
inheritance it is that you are leaving to your son.

bernick (in tones of suppressed despair): it is a thousand times worse
than you think. but surely some day the curse must be lifted; and
yet--nevertheless--. (vehemently.) how could i bring all this upon my
own head! still, it is done now; i must go on with it now. you shall
not succeed in crushing me! (hilmar comes in hurriedly and agitatedly
from the right, with an open letter in his hand.)

hilmar: but this is--betty, betty.

bernick: what is the matter? are they coming already?

hilmar: no, no--but i must speak to some one immediately. (goes out
through the farther door on the left.)

lona: karsten, you talk about our having come here to crush you. so let
me tell you what sort of stuff this prodigal son, whom your moral
community shuns as if he had the plague, is made of. he can do without
any of you--for he is away now.

bernick: but he said he meant to come back

lona: johan will never come back. he is gone for good, and dina with
him.

bernick: never come back?--and dina with him?

lona: yes, to be his wife. that is how these two strike your virtuous
community in the face, just as i did once--but never mind that.

bernick: gone--and she too--in the "indian girl"--

lona: no; he would not trust so precious a freight to that rascally
crew. johan and dina are on the "palm tree."

bernick: ah! then it is all in vain-- (goes hurriedly to the door of
his room, opens it and calls in.) krap, stop the "indian girl"--she
must not sail tonight!

krap (from within): the "indian girl" is already standing out to sea,
mr. bernick.

bernick (shutting the door and speaking faintly): too late--and all to
no purpose--

lona: what do you mean?

bernick: nothing, nothing. leave me alone!

lona: hm!--look here, karsten. johan was good enough to say that he
entrusted to me the good name and reputation that he once lent to you,
and also the good name that you stole from him while he was away. johan
will hold his tongue; and i can act just as i please in the matter.
see, i have two letters in my hand.

bernick: you have got them! and you mean now--this very evening-perhaps
when the procession comes--

lona: i did not come back here to betray you, but to stir your
conscience so that you should speak of your own free will. i did not
succeed in doing that--so you must remain as you are, with your life
founded upon a lie. look, i am tearing your two letters in pieces. take
the wretched things--there you are. now there is no evidence against
you, karsten. you are safe now; be happy, too--if you can.

bernick (much moved): lona--why did you not do that sooner! now it is
too late; life no longer seems good to me; i cannot live on after today.

lona: what has happened?

bernick: do not ask me--but i must live on, nevertheless! i will
live--for olaf's sake. he shall make amends for everything--expiate
everything.

lona: karsten--! (hilmar comes hurriedly back.)

hilmar: i cannot find anyone; they are all out--even betty!

bernick: what is the matter with you?

hilmar: i daren't tell you.

bernick: what is it? you must tell me!

hilmar: very well--olaf has run away, on board the "indian girl."

bernick (stumbling back): olaf--on board the "indian girl"! no, no!

lona: yes, he is! now i understand--i saw him jump out of the window.

bernick (calls in through the door of his room in a despairing voice):
krap, stop the "indian girl" at any cost!

krap: it is impossible, sir. how can you suppose--?

bernick: we must stop her; olaf is on board!

krap: what!

rummel (coming out of bernick's room): olaf, run away? impossible!

sandstad (following him): he will be sent back with the pilot, mr.
bernick.

hilmar: no, no; he has written to me. (shows the letter.) he says he
means to hide among the cargo till they are in the open sea.

bernick: i shall never see him again!

rummel: what nonsense!--a good strong ship, newly repaired...

vigeland (who has followed the others out of bernick's room): and in
your own yard, mr. bernick!

bernick: i shall never see him again, i tell you. i have lost him,
lona; and--i see it now--he never was really mine. (listens.) what is
that?

rummel: music. the procession must be coming.

bernick. i cannot take any part in it--i will not.

rummel: what are you thinking of! that is impossible.

sandstad: impossible, mr. bernick; think what you have at stake.

bernick: what does it all matter to me now? what have i to work for now?

rummel: can you ask? you have us and the community.

vigeland: quite true.

sandstad: and surely, mr. bernick, you have not forgotten that
we--.(martha comes in through the farther door to the left. music is
heard in the distance, down the street.)

martha: the procession is just coming, but betty is not in the house. i
don't understand where she--

bernick: not in the house! there, you see, lona--no support to me,
either in gladness or in sorrow.

rummel: draw back the curtains! come and help me, mr. krap--and you,
mr. sandstad. it is a thousand pities that the family should not be
united just now; it is quite contrary to the program. (they draw back
all the curtains. the whole street is seen to be illuminated. opposite
the house is a large transparency, bearing the words: "long live
karsten bernick, pillar of our society ")

bernick (shrinking back): take all that away! i don't want to see it!
put it out, put it out!

rummel: excuse me, mr. bernick, but are you not well?

martha: what is the matter with him, lona?

lona: hush! (whispers to her.)

bernick: take away those mocking words, i tell you! can't you see that
all these lights are grinning at us?

rummel: well, really, i must confess--

bernick: oh, how could you understand--! but i, i--! it is all like
candles in a dead-room!

rummel: well, let me tell you that you are taking the thing a great
deal too seriously.

sandstad: the boy will enjoy a trip across the atlantic, and then you
will have him back.

vigeland: only put your trust in the almighty, mr. bernick.

rummel: and in the vessel, bernick; it is not likely to sink, i know.

krap: hm--

rummel: now if it were one of those floating coffins that one hears are
sent out by men in the bigger countries--

bernick: i am sure my hair must be turning grey--

(mrs. bernick comes in from the garden, with a shawl thrown over her
head.)

mrs. bernick: karsten, karsten, do you know--?

bernick: yes. i know; but you--you, who see nothing that is going
on--you, who have no mother's eyes for your son--!

mrs. bernick: listen to me, do!

bernick: why did you not look after him? now i have lost him. give him
back to me, if you can.

mrs. bernick: i can! i have got him.

bernick: you have got him!

the men: ah!

hilmar: yes, i thought so.

martha: you have got him back, karsten.

lona: yes--make him your own, now.

bernick: you have got him! is that true? where is he?

mrs. bernick: i shall not tell you, till you have forgiven him.

bernick: forgiven! but how did you know--?

mrs. bernick: do you not think a mother sees? i was in mortal fear of
your getting to know anything about it. some words he let fall
yesterday--and then his room was empty, and his knapsack and clothes
missing...

bernick: yes, yes?

mrs. bernick: i ran, and got hold of aune; we went out in his boat; the
american ship was on the point of sailing. thank god, we were in
time--got on board--searched the hold--found him! oh, karsten, you must
not punish him!

bernick: betty!

mrs. bernick: nor aune, either!

bernick: aune? what do you know about him? is the "indian girl" under
sail again?

mrs. bernick: no, that is just it.

bernick: speak, speak!

mrs. bernick: aune was just as agitated as i was; the search took us
some time; it had grown dark, and the pilot made objections; and so
aune took upon himself--in your name--

bernick: well?

mrs. bernick: to stop the ship's sailing till tomorrow.

krap: hm--

bernick: oh, how glad i am!

mrs. bernick: you are not angry?

bernick: i cannot tell you how glad i am, betty

rummel: you really take things far too seriously.

hilmar: oh yes, as soon as it is a question of a little struggle with
the elements--ugh!

krap (going to the window): the procession is just coming through your
garden gate, mr. bernick.

bernick: yes, they can come now.

rummel: the whole garden is full of people.

sandstad: the whole street is crammed.

rummel: the whole town is afoot, bernick. it really is a moment that
makes one proud.

vigeland: let us take it in a humble spirit, mr. rummel.

rummel: all the banners are out! what a procession! here comes the
committee with mr. rorlund at their head.

bernick: yes, let them come in!

rummel: but, bernick--in your present agitated frame of mind--

bernick: well, what?

rummel: i am quite willing to speak instead of you, if you like.

bernick: no, thank you; i will speak for myself tonight.

rummel: but are you sure you know what to say?

bernick: yes, make your mind easy, rummel--i know now what to say.

(the music grows louder. the verandah door is opened. rorlund comes in,
at the head of the committee, escorted by a couple of hired waiters,
who carry a covered basket. they are followed by townspeople of all
classes, as many as can get into the room. an apparently endless crowd
of people, waving banners and flags, are visible in the garden and the
street.)

rorlund: mr. bernick! i see, from the surprise depicted upon your face,
that it is as unexpected guests that we are intruding upon your happy
family circle and your peaceful fireside, where we find you surrounded
by honoured and energetic fellow citizens and friends. but it is our
hearts that have bidden us come to offer you our homage--not for the
first time, it is true, but for the first time on such a comprehensive
scale. we have on many occasions given you our thanks for the broad
moral foundation upon which you have, so to speak, reared the edifice
of our community. on this occasion we offer our homage especially to
the clear-sighted, indefatigable, unselfish--nay, self-sacrificing
citizen who has taken the initiative in an undertaking which, we are
assured on all sides, will give a powerful impetus to the temporal
prosperity and welfare of our community.

voices: bravo, bravo!

rorlund: you, sir, have for many years been a shining example in our
midst. this is not the place for me to speak of your family life, which
has been a model to us all; still less to enlarge upon your unblemished
personal character. such topics belong to the stillness of a man's own
chamber, not to a festal occasion such as this! i am here to speak of
your public life as a citizen, as it lies open to all men's eyes.
well-equipped vessels sail away from your shipyard and carry our flag
far and wide over the seas. a numerous and happy band of workmen look
up to you as to a father. by calling new branches of industry into
existence, you have laid the foundations of the welfare of hundreds of
families. in a word--you are, in the fullest sense of the term, the
mainstay of our community.

voices: hear, hear! bravo!

rorlund: and, sir, it is just that disinterestedness, which colours all
your conduct, that is so beneficial to our community--more so than
words can express--and especially at the present moment. you are now on
the point of procuring for us what i have no hesitation in calling
bluntly by its prosaic name--a railway!

voices: bravo, bravo!

rorlund: but it would seem as though the undertaking were beset by
certain difficulties, the outcome of narrow and selfish considerations.

voices: hear, hear!

rorlund: for the fact has come to light that certain individuals, who
do not belong to our community, have stolen a march upon the
hard-working citizens of this place, and have laid hands on certain
sources of profit which by rights should have fallen to the share of
our town.

voices: that's right! hear, hear!

rorlund: this regrettable fact has naturally come to your knowledge
also, mr. bernick. but it has not had the slightest effect in deterring
you from proceeding steadily with your project, well knowing that a
patriotic man should not solely take local interests into consideration.

voices: oh!--no, no!--yes, yes!

rorlund: it is to such a man--to the patriot citizen, whose character
we all should emulate--that we bring our homage this evening. may your
undertaking grow to be a real and lasting source of good fortune to
this community! it is true enough that a railway may be the means of
our exposing ourselves to the incursion of pernicious influences from
without; but it gives us also the means of quickly expelling them from
within. for even we, at the present time, cannot boast of being
entirely free from the danger of such outside influences; but as we
have, on this very evening--if rumour is to be believed--fortunately
got rid of certain elements of that nature, sooner than was to be
expected--

voices: order, order!

rorlund:--i regard the occurrence as a happy omen for our undertaking.
my alluding to such a thing at such a moment only emphasises the fact
that the house in which we are now standing is one where the claims of
morality are esteemed even above ties of family.

voices: hear, hear! bravo!

bernick (at the same moment): allow me--

rorlund: i have only a few more words to say, mr. bernick. what you
have done for your native place we all know has not been done with any
underlying idea of its bringing tangible profit to yourself. but,
nevertheless, you must not refuse to accept a slight token of grateful
appreciation at the hands of your fellow-citizens--least of all at this
important moment when, according to the assurances of practical men, we
are standing on the threshold of a new era.

voices: bravo! hear, hear!

(rorlund signs to the servants, who bring forward the basket. during
the following speech, members of the committee take out and present the
various objects mentioned.)

rorlund: and so, mr. bernick, we have the pleasure of presenting you
with this silver coffee-service. let it grace your board when in the
future, as so often in the past, we have the happiness of being
assembled under your hospitable roof. you, too, gentlemen, who have so
generously seconded the leader of our community, we ask to accept a
small souvenir. this silver goblet is for you, mr. rummel. many a time
have you, amidst the clink of glasses, defended the interests of your
fellow-citizens in well-chosen words; may you often find similar worthy
opportunities to raise and empty this goblet in some patriotic toast!
to you, mr. sandstad, i present this album containing photographs of
your fellow-citizens. your well-known and conspicuous liberality has
put you in the pleasant position of being able to number your friends
amongst all classes of society. and to you, mr. vigeland, i have to
offer this book of family devotions, printed on vellum and handsomely
bound, to grace your study table. the mellowing influence of time has
led you to take an earnest view of life; your zeal in carrying out your
daily duties has, for a long period of years, been purified and enobled
by thoughts of higher and holier things. (turns to the crowd.) and now,
friends, three cheers for mr. bernick and his fellow-workers! three
cheers for the pillars of our society!

the whole crowd: bernick! pillars of society! hurrah-hurrah-hurrah!

lona: i congratulate you, brother-in-law.

(an expectant hush follows.)

bernick (speaking seriously and slowly): fellow citizens--your
spokesman said just now that tonight we are standing on the threshold
of a new era. i hope that will prove to be the case. but before that
can come to pass, we must lay fast hold of truth--truth which, till
tonight, has been altogether and in all circumstances a stranger to
this community of ours. (astonishment among the audience.) to that end,
i must begin by deprecating the praises with which you, mr. rorlund,
according to custom on such occasions, have overwhelmed me. i do not
deserve them; because, until today, my actions have by no means been
disinterested. even though i may not always have aimed at pecuniary
profit, i at all events recognise now that a craving for power,
influence and position has been the moving spirit of most of my actions.

rummel (half aloud): what next!

bernick: standing before my fellow citizens, i do not reproach myself
for that; because i still think i am entitled to a place in the front
rank of our capable men of affairs.

voices: yes, yes, yes!

bernick: but what i charge myself with is that i have so often been
weak enough to resort to deceitfulness, because i knew and feared the
tendency of the community to espy unclean motives behind everything a
prominent man here undertakes. and now i am coming to a point which
will illustrate that.

rummel (uneasily): hm-hm!

bernick: there have been rumours of extensive purchases of property
outside the town. these purchases have been made by me--by me alone,
and by no one else. (murmurs are heard: "what does he
say?--he?--bernick?") the properties are, for the time being, in my
hands. naturally i have confided in my fellow-workers, mr. rummel, mr.
vigeland and mr. sandstad, and we are all agreed that--

rummel: it is not true! prove it--prove it!

vigeland: we are not all agreed about anything!

sandstad: well, really i must say--!

bernick: that is quite true--we are not yet agreed upon the matter i
was going to mention. but i confidently hope that these three gentlemen
will agree with me when i announce to you that i have tonight come to
the decision that these properties shall be exploited as a company of
which the shares shall be offered for public subscription; any one that
wishes can take shares.

voices: hurrah! three cheers for bernick!

rummel (in a low voice, to bernick): this is the basest treachery--!

sandstad (also in an undertone): so you have been fooling us!

vigeland: well, then, devil take--! good lord, what am i saying?
(cheers are heard without.)

bernick: silence, gentlemen. i have no right to this homage you offer
me; because the decision i have just come to does not represent what
was my first intention. my intention was to keep the whole thing for
myself; and, even now, i am of opinion that these properties would be
worked to best advantage if they remained in one man's hands. but you
are at liberty to choose. if you wish it, i am willing to administer
them to the best of my abilities.

voices: yes, yes, yes!

bernick: but, first of all, my fellow townsmen must know me thoroughly.
and let each man seek to know himself thoroughly, too; and so let it
really come to pass that tonight we begin a new era. the old era--with
its affectation, its hypocrisy and its emptiness, its pretence of
virtue and its miserable fear of public opinion--shall be for us like a
museum, open for purposes of instruction; and to that museum we will
present--shall we not, gentlemen?--the coffee service, and the goblet,
and the album, and the family devotions printed on vellum, and
handsomely bound.

rummel: oh, of course.

vigeland (muttering): if you have taken everything else, then--

sandstad: by all means.

bernick: and now for the principal reckoning i have to make with the
community. mr. rorlund said that certain pernicious elements had left
us this evening. i can add what you do not yet know. the man referred
to did not go away alone; with him, to become his wife, went--

lona (loudly): dina dorf!

rorlund: what?

mrs. bernick: what? (great commotion.)

rorlund: fled? run away--with him! impossible!

bernick: to become his wife, mr. rorlund. and i will add more. (in a
low voice, to his wife.) betty, be strong to bear what is coming.
(aloud.) this is what i have to say: hats off to that man, for he has
nobly taken another's guilt upon his shoulders. my friends, i want to
have done with falsehood; it has very nearly poisoned every fibre of my
being. you shall know all. fifteen years ago, i was the guilty man.

mrs. bernick (softly and tremblingly): karsten!

martha (similarly): ah, johan--!

lona: now at last you have found yourself!

(speechless consternation among the audience.)

bernick: yes, friends, i was the guilty one, and he went away. the vile
and lying rumours that were spread abroad afterwards, it is beyond
human power to refute now; but i have no right to complain of that. for
fifteen years i have climbed up the ladder of success by the help of
those rumours; whether now they are to cast me down again, or not, each
of you must decide in his own mind.

rorlund: what a thunderbolt! our leading citizen--! (in a low voice, to
betty.) how sorry i am for you, mrs. bernick!

hilmar: what a confession! well, i must say--!

bernick: but come to no decision tonight. i entreat every one to go
home--to collect his thoughts--to look into his own heart. when once
more you can think calmly, then it will be seen whether i have lost or
won by speaking out. goodbye! i have still much--very much--to repent
of; but that concerns my own conscience only. good night! take away all
these signs of rejoicing. we must all feel that they are out of place
here.

rorlund: that they certainly are. (in an undertone to mrs. bernick.)
run away! so then she was completely unworthy of me. (louder, to the
committee.) yes, gentlemen, after this i think we had better disperse
as quietly as possible.

hilmar: how, after this, any one is to manage to hold the ideal's
banner high--ugh!

(meantime the news has been whispered from mouth to mouth. the crowd
gradually disperses from the garden. rummel, sandstad and vigeland go
out, arguing eagerly but in a low voice. hilmar slinks away to the
right. when silence is restored, there only remain in the room bernick,
mrs. bernick, martha, lona and krap.)

bernick: betty, can you forgive me?

mrs. bernick (looking at him with a smile): do you know, karsten, that
you have opened out for me the happiest prospect i have had for many a
year?

bernick: how?

mrs. bernick: for many years, i have felt that once you were mine and
that i had lost you. now i know that you never have been mine yet; but
i shall win you.

bernick (folding her in his arms): oh, betty, you have won me. it was
through lona that i first learned really to know you. but now let olaf
come to me.

mrs. bernick: yes, you shall have him now. mr. krap--! (talks softly to
krap in the background. he goes out by the garden door. during what
follows, the illuminations and lights in the houses are gradually
extinguished.)

bernick (in a low voice): thank you, lona--you have saved what was best
in me--and for me.

lona: do you suppose i wanted to do anything else?

bernick: yes, was that so--or not? i cannot quite make you out.

lona: hm--

bernick: then it was not hatred? not revenge? why did you come back,
then?

lona: old friendship does not rust.

bernick: lona!

lona: when johan told me about the lie, i swore to myself that the hero
of my youth should stand free and true.

bernick: what a wretch i am!--and how little i have deserved it of you!

lona. oh, if we women always looked for what we deserve, karsten--!
(aune comes in with olaf from the garden.)

bernick (going to meet them): olaf!

olaf: father, i promise i will never do it again--

bernick: never run away?

olaf: yes, yes, i promise you, father.

bernick: and i promise you, you shall never have reason to. for the
future you shall be allowed to grow up, not as the heir to my life's
work, but as one who has his own life's work before him.

olaf: and shall i be allowed to be what i like, when i grow up?

bernick: yes.

olaf. oh, thank you! then i won't be a pillar of society.

bernick: no? why not?

olaf: no--i think it must be so dull.

bernick: you shall be yourself, olaf; the rest may take care of
itself--and you, aune...

aune: i know, mr. bernick; i am dismissed.

bernick: we remain together, aune; and forgive me.

aune: what? the ship has not sailed tonight.

bernick: nor will it sail tomorrow, either. i gave you too short grace.
it must be looked to more thoroughly.

aune: it shall, mr. bernick--and with the new machines!

bernick: by all means--but thoroughly and conscientiously. there are
many among us who need thorough and conscientious repairs, aune. well,
good night.

aune: good-night, sir--and thank you, thank you. (goes out.)

mrs. bernick: now they are all gone.

bernick: and we are alone. my name is not shining in letters of fire
any longer; all the lights in the windows are out.

lona: would you wish them lit again?

bernick: not for anything in the world. where have i been! you would be

horrified if you knew. i feel now as if i had come back to my right
senses, after being poisoned. but i feel this that i can be young and
healthy again. oh, come nearer--come closer round me. come, betty!
come, olaf, my boy! and you, martha--it seems to me as if i had never
seen you all these years.

lona: no, i can believe that. your community is a community of bachelor
souls; you do not see women.

bernick: that is quite true; and for that very reason--this is a
bargain, lona--you must not leave betty and me.

mrs. bernick: no, lona, you must not.

lona: no, how could i have the heart to go away and leave you young
people who are just setting up housekeeping? am i not your
foster-mother? you and i, martha, the two old aunts-- what are you
looking at?

martha: look how the sky is clearing, and how light it is over the sea.
the "palm tree" is going to be lucky.

lona: it carries its good luck on board.

bernick: and we--we have a long earnest day of work ahead of us; i most
of all. but let it come; only keep close round me you true, loyal
women. i have learned this too, in these last few days; it is you women
that are the pillars of society.

lona: you have learned a poor sort of wisdom, then, brother-in-law.
(lays her hand firmly upon his shoulder.) no, my friend; the spirit of
truth and the spirit of freedom--they are the pillars of society.


<|EndOfText|>

introduction.

the winter of 1879-80 ibsen spent in munich, and the greater part of the
summer of 1880 at berchtesgaden. november 1880 saw him back in rome, and
he passed the summer of 1881 at sorrento. there, fourteen years earlier,
he had written the last acts of _peer gynt_; there he now wrote, or at
any rate completed, _gengangere_. it was published in december 1881,
after he had returned to rome. on december 22 he wrote to ludwig
passarge, one of his german translators, "my new play has now appeared,
and has occasioned a terrible uproar in the scandinavian press; every
day i receive letters and newspaper articles decrying or praising it....
i consider it utterly impossible that any german theatre will accept the
play at present. i hardly believe that they will dare to play it in the
scandinavian countries for some time to come." how rightly he judged we
shall see anon.

in the newspapers there was far more obloquy than praise. two men,
however, stood by him from the first: björnson, from whom he had been
practically estranged ever since _the league of youth_, and georg
brandes. the latter published an article in which he declared (i quote
from memory) that the play might or might not be ibsen's greatest
work, but that it was certainly his noblest deed. it was, doubtless, in
acknowledgment of this article that ibsen wrote to brandes on january 3,
1882: "yesterday i had the great pleasure of receiving your brilliantly
clear and so warmly appreciative review of _ghosts_.... all who read
your article must, it seems to me, have their eyes opened to what i
meant by my new book--assuming, that is, that they have any _wish_ to
see. for i cannot get rid of the impression that a very large number of
the false interpretations which have appeared in the newspapers are
the work of people who know better. in norway, however, i am willing to
believe that the stultification has in most cases been unintentional;
and the reason is not far to seek. in that country a great many of the
critics are theologians, more or less disguised; and these gentlemen
are, as a rule, quite unable to write rationally about creative
literature. that enfeeblement of judgment which, at least in the case
of the average man, is an inevitable consequence of prolonged occupation
with theological studies, betrays itself more especially in the judging
of human character, human actions, and human motives. practical business
judgment, on the other hand, does not suffer so much from studies of
this order. therefore the reverend gentlemen are very often excellent
members of local boards; but they are unquestionably our worst critics."
this passage is interesting as showing clearly the point of view from
which ibsen conceived the character of manders. in the next paragraph
of the same letter he discusses the attitude of "the so-called liberal
press"; but as the paragraph contains the germ of _an enemy of the
people_, it may most fittingly be quoted in the introduction to that
play.

three days later (january 6) ibsen wrote to schandorph, the danish
novelist: "i was quite prepared for the hubbub. if certain of our
scandinavian reviewers have no talent for anything else, they have
an unquestionable talent for thoroughly misunderstanding and
misinterpreting those authors whose books they undertake to judge....
they endeavour to make me responsible for the opinions which certain of
the personages of my drama express. and yet there is not in the whole
book a single opinion, a single utterance, which can be laid to the
account of the author. i took good care to avoid this. the very method,
the order of technique which imposes its form upon the play, forbids
the author to appear in the speeches of his characters. my object was
to make the reader feel that he was going through a piece of real
experience; and nothing could more effectually prevent such an
impression than the intrusion of the author's private opinions into the
dialogue. do they imagine at home that i am so inexpert in the theory of
drama as not to know this? of course i know it, and act accordingly.
in no other play that i have written is the author so external to the
action, so entirely absent from it, as in this last one."

"they say," he continued, "that the book preaches nihilism. not at all.
it is not concerned to preach anything whatsoever. it merely points
to the ferment of nihilism going on under the surface, at home as
elsewhere. a pastor manders will always goad one or other mrs. alving
to revolt. and just because she is a woman, she will, when once she has
begun, go to the utmost extremes."

towards the end of january ibsen wrote from rome to olaf skavlan:
"these last weeks have brought me a wealth of experiences, lessons, and
discoveries. i, of course, foresaw that my new play would call forth a
howl from the camp of the stagnationists; and for this i care no more
than for the barking of a pack of chained dogs. but the pusillanimity
which i have observed among the so-called liberals has given me cause
for reflection. the very day after my play was published the _dagblad_
rushed out a hurriedly-written article, evidently designed to purge
itself of all suspicion of complicity in my work. this was entirely
unnecessary. i myself am responsible for what i write, i and no one
else. i cannot possibly embarrass any party, for to no party do i
belong. i stand like a solitary franc-tireur at the outposts, and
fight for my own hand. the only man in norway who has stood up freely,
frankly, and courageously for me is björnson. it is just like him. he
has in truth a great, kingly soul, and i shall never forget his action
in this matter."

one more quotation completes the history of these stirring january
days, as written by ibsen himself. it occurs in a letter to a danish
journalist, otto borchsenius. "it may well be," the poet writes, "that
the play is in several respects rather daring. but it seemed to me
that the time had come for moving some boundary-posts. and this was an
undertaking for which a man of the older generation, like myself, was
better fitted than the many younger authors who might desire to do
something of the kind. i was prepared for a storm; but such storms one
must not shrink from encountering. that would be cowardice."

it happened that, just in these days, the present writer had frequent
opportunities of conversing with ibsen, and of hearing from his own lips
almost all the views expressed in the above extracts. he was especially
emphatic, i remember, in protesting against the notion that the opinions
expressed by mrs. alving or oswald were to be attributed to himself. he
insisted, on the contrary, that mrs. alving's views were merely typical
of the moral chaos inevitably produced by re-action from the narrow
conventionalism represented by manders.

with one consent, the leading theatres of the three scandinavian
capitals declined to have anything to do with the play. it was more
than eighteen months old before it found its way to the stage at all. in
august 1883 it was acted for the first time at helsingborg, sweden, by
a travelling company under the direction of an eminent swedish actor,
august lindberg, who himself played oswald. he took it on tour round the
principal cities of scandinavia, playing it, among the rest, at a minor
theatre in christiania. it happened that the boards of the christiania
theatre were at the same time occupied by a french farce; and public
demonstrations of protest were made against the managerial policy which
gave _tête de linotte_ the preference over _gengangere_. gradually the
prejudice against the play broke down. already in the autumn of 1883 it
was produced at the royal (dramatiska) theatre in stockholm. when the
new national theatre was opened in christiania in 1899, _gengangere_
found an early place in its repertory; and even the royal theatre in
copenhagen has since opened its doors to the tragedy.

not until april 1886 was _gespenster_ acted in germany, and then only at
a private performance, at the stadttheater, augsburg, the poet himself
being present. in the following winter it was acted at the famous court
theatre at meiningen, again in the presence of the poet. the first
(private) performance in berlin took place on january 9, 1887, at the
residenz theater; and when the freie bühne, founded on the model of the
paris theatre libre, began its operations two years later (september 29,
1889), _gespenster_ was the first play that it produced. the freie bühne
gave the initial impulse to the whole modern movement which has given
germany a new dramatic literature; and the leaders of the movement,
whether authors or critics, were one and all ardent disciples of ibsen,
who regarded _gespenster_ as his typical masterpiece. in germany,
then, the play certainly did, in ibsen's own words, "move some
boundary-posts." the prussian censorship presently withdrew its veto,
and on november 27, 1894, the two leading literary theatres of berlin,
the deutsches theater and the lessing theater, gave simultaneous
performances of the tragedy. everywhere in germany and austria it is
now freely performed; but it is naturally one of the least popular of
ibsen's plays.

it was with _les revenants_ that ibsen made his first appearance on the
french stage. the play was produced by the théâtre libre (at the
théâtre des menus-plaisirs) on may 29, 1890. here, again, it became the
watchword of the new school of authors and critics, and aroused a good
deal of opposition among the old school. but the most hostile french
criticisms were moderation itself compared with the torrents of abuse
which were poured upon _ghosts_ by the journalists of london when, on
march 13, 1891, the independent theatre, under the direction of mr. j.
t. grein, gave a private performance of the play at the royalty theatre,
soho. i have elsewhere [note: see "the mausoleum of ibsen," _fortnightly
review_, august 1893. see also mr. bernard shaw's _quintessence of
ibsenism_, p. 89, and my introduction to ghosts in the single-volume
edition.] placed upon record some of the amazing feats of vituperation
achieved of the critics, and will not here recall them. it is sufficient
to say that if the play had been a tenth part as nauseous as the
epithets hurled at it and its author, the censor's veto would have been
amply justified. that veto is still (1906) in force. england enjoys the
proud distinction of being the one country in the world where _ghosts_
may not be publicly acted. in the united states, the first performance
of the play in english took place at the berkeley lyceum, new york city,
on january 5, 1894. the production was described by mr. w. d. howells as
"a great theatrical event--the very greatest i have ever known." other
leading men of letters were equally impressed by it. five years later, a
second production took place at the carnegie lyceum; and an adventurous
manager has even taken the play on tour in the united states. the
italian version of the tragedy, _gli spettri_, has ever since 1892
taken a prominent place in the repertory of the great actors zaccone and
novelli, who have acted it, not only throughout italy, but in austria,
germany, russia, spain, and south america.

in an interview, published immediately after ibsen's death, björnstjerne
björnson, questioned as to what he held to be his brother-poet's
greatest work, replied, without a moment's hesitation, _gengangere_.
this dictum can scarcely, i think, be accepted without some
qualification. even confining our attention to the modern plays, and
leaving out of comparison _the pretenders_, _brand_, and _peer gynt_,
we can scarcely call _ghosts_ ibsen's richest or most human play, and
certainly not his profoundest or most poetical. if some omnipotent
censorship decreed the annihilation of all his works save one, few
people, i imagine, would vote that that one should be _ghosts_. even if
half a dozen works were to be saved from the wreck, i doubt whether i,
for my part, would include _ghosts_ in the list. it is, in my judgment,
a little bare, hard, austere. it is the first work in which ibsen
applies his new technical method--evolved, as i have suggested, during
the composition of _a doll's house_--and he applies it with something
of fanaticism. he is under the sway of a prosaic ideal--confessed in the
phrase, "my object was to make the reader feel that he was going through
a piece of real experience"--and he is putting some constraint upon
the poet within him. the action moves a little stiffly, and all in one
rhythm. it lacks variety and suppleness. moreover, the play affords some
slight excuse for the criticism which persists in regarding ibsen as a
preacher rather than as a creator--an author who cares more for ideas
and doctrines than for human beings. though mrs. alving, engstrand and
regina are rounded and breathing characters, it cannot be denied that
manders strikes one as a clerical type rather than an individual, while
even oswald might not quite unfairly be described as simply and solely
his father's son, an object-lesson in heredity. we cannot be said to
know him, individually and intimately, as we know helmer or stockmann,
hialmar ekdal or gregors werle. then, again, there are one or two
curious flaws in the play. the question whether oswald's "case" is one
which actually presents itself in the medical books seems to me of very
trifling moment. it is typically true, even if it be not true in detail.
the suddenness of the catastrophe may possibly be exaggerated, its
premonitions and even its essential nature may be misdescribed. on the
other hand, i conceive it probable that the poet had documents to found
upon, which may be unknown to his critics. i have never taken any pains
to satisfy myself upon the point, which seems to me quite immaterial.
there is not the slightest doubt that the life-history of a captain
alving may, and often does, entail upon posterity consequences quite
as tragic as those which ensue in oswald's case, and far more
wide-spreading. that being so, the artistic justification of the poet's
presentment of the case is certainly not dependent on its absolute
scientific accuracy. the flaws above alluded to are of another nature.
one of them is the prominence given to the fact that the asylum
is uninsured. no doubt there is some symbolical purport in the
circumstance; but i cannot think that it is either sufficiently clear or
sufficiently important to justify the emphasis thrown upon it at the
end of the second act. another dubious point is oswald's argument in
the first act as to the expensiveness of marriage as compared with free
union. since the parties to free union, as he describes it, accept all
the responsibilities of marriage, and only pretermit the ceremony, the
difference of expense, one would suppose, must be neither more nor less
than the actual marriage fee. i have never seen this remark of oswald's
adequately explained, either as a matter of economic fact, or as a
trait of character. another blemish, of somewhat greater moment, is the
inconceivable facility with which, in the third act, manders suffers
himself to be victimised by engstrand. all these little things, taken
together, detract, as it seems to me, from the artistic completeness of
the play, and impair its claim to rank as the poet's masterpiece. even
in prose drama, his greatest and most consummate achievements were yet
to come.

must we, then, wholly dissent from björnson's judgment? i think not. in
a historical, if not in an aesthetic, sense, _ghosts_ may well rank as
ibsen's greatest work. it was the play which first gave the full measure
of his technical and spiritual originality and daring. it has done
far more than any other of his plays to "move boundary-posts." it has
advanced the frontiers of dramatic art and implanted new ideals, both
technical and intellectual, in the minds of a whole generation of
playwrights. it ranks with _hernani_ and _la dame aux camélias_ among
the epoch-making plays of the nineteenth century, while in point of
essential originality it towers above them. we cannot, i think, get
nearer to the truth than georg brandes did in the above-quoted phrase
from his first notice of the play, describing it as not, perhaps, the
poet's greatest work, but certainly his noblest deed. in another essay,
brandes has pointed to it, with equal justice, as marking ibsen's final
breach with his early--one might almost say his hereditary romanticism.
he here becomes, at last, "the most modern of the moderns." "this, i am
convinced," says the danish critic, "is his imperishable glory, and will
give lasting life to his works."




ghosts

a family-drama in three acts.

(1881)


characters.

  mrs. helen alving, widow of captain alving, late chamberlain to
  the king. [note: chamberlain (kammerherre) is the only title of
  honour now existing in norway. it is a distinction conferred by the
  king on men of wealth and position, and is not hereditary.]
  oswald alving, her son, a painter.
  pastor manders.
  jacob engstrand, a carpenter.
  regina engstrand, mrs. alving's maid.

the action takes place at mrs. alving's country house, beside one of the
large fjords in western norway.




act first.

[a spacious garden-room, with one door to the left, and two doors to the
right. in the middle of the room a round table, with chairs about it. on
the table lie books, periodicals, and newspapers. in the foreground to
the left a window, and by it a small sofa, with a worktable in front of
it. in the background, the room is continued into a somewhat narrower
conservatory, the walls of which are formed by large panes of glass. in
the right-hand wall of the conservatory is a door leading down into
the garden. through the glass wall a gloomy fjord landscape is faintly
visible, veiled by steady rain.]

[engstrand, the carpenter, stands by the garden door. his left leg
is somewhat bent; he has a clump of wood under the sole of his boot.
regina, with an empty garden syringe in her hand, hinders him from
advancing.]

regina. [in a low voice.] what do you want? stop where you are. you're
positively dripping.

engstrand. it's the lord's own rain, my girl.

regina. it's the devil's rain, _i_ say.

engstrand. lord, how you talk, regina. [limps a step or two forward into
the room.] it's just this as i wanted to say--

regina. don't clatter so with that foot of yours, i tell you! the young
master's asleep upstairs.

engstrand. asleep? in the middle of the day?

regina. it's no business of yours.

engstrand. i was out on the loose last night--

regina. i can quite believe that.

engstrand. yes, we're weak vessels, we poor mortals, my girl--

regina. so it seems.

engstrand.--and temptations are manifold in this world, you see. but all
the same, i was hard at work, god knows, at half-past five this morning.

regina. very well; only be off now. i won't stop here and have
_rendezvous's_ [note: this and other french words by regina are in that
language in the original] with you.

engstrand. what do you say you won't have?

regina. i won't have any one find you here; so just you go about your
business.

engstrand. [advances a step or two.] blest if i go before i've had
a talk with you. this afternoon i shall have finished my work at the
school house, and then i shall take to-night's boat and be off home to
the town.

regina. [mutters.] pleasant journey to you!

engstrand. thank you, my child. to-morrow the orphanage is to be opened,
and then there'll be fine doings, no doubt, and plenty of intoxicating
drink going, you know. and nobody shall say of jacob engstrand that he
can't keep out of temptation's way.

regina. oh!

engstrand. you see, there's to be heaps of grand folks here to-morrow.
pastor manders is expected from town, too.

regina. he's coming to-day.

engstrand. there, you see! and i should be cursedly sorry if he found
out anything against me, don't you understand?

regina. oho! is that your game?

engstrand. is what my game?

regina. [looking hard at him.] what are you going to fool pastor manders
into doing, this time?

engstrand. sh! sh! are you crazy? do _i_ want to fool pastor manders? oh
no! pastor manders has been far too good a friend to me for that. but i
just wanted to say, you know--that i mean to be off home again to-night.

regina. the sooner the better, say i.

engstrand. yes, but i want you with me, regina.

regina. [open-mouthed.] you want me--? what are you talking about?

engstrand. i want you to come home with me, i say.

regina. [scornfully.] never in this world shall you get me home with
you.

engstrand. oh, we'll see about that.

regina. yes, you may be sure we'll see about it! me, that have been
brought up by a lady like mrs. alving! me, that am treated almost as a
daughter here! is it me you want to go home with you?--to a house like
yours? for shame!

engstrand. what the devil do you mean? do you set yourself up against
your father, you hussy?

regina. [mutters without looking at him.] you've said often enough i was
no concern of yours.

engstrand. pooh! why should you bother about that--

regina. haven't you many a time sworn at me and called me a--? _fi
donc_!

engstrand. curse me, now, if ever i used such an ugly word.

regina. oh, i remember very well what word you used.

engstrand. well, but that was only when i was a bit on, don't you know?
temptations are manifold in this world, regina.

regina. ugh!

engstrand. and besides, it was when your mother was that aggravating--i
had to find something to twit her with, my child. she was always setting
up for a fine lady. [mimics.] "let me go, engstrand; let me be.
remember i was three years in chamberlain alving's family at rosenvold."
[laughs.] mercy on us! she could never forget that the captain was made
a chamberlain while she was in service here.

regina. poor mother! you very soon tormented her into her grave.

engstrand. [with a twist of his shoulders.] oh, of course! i'm to have
the blame for everything.

regina. [turns away; half aloud.] ugh--! and that leg too!

engstrand. what do you say, my child?

regina. _pied de mouton_.

engstrand. is that english, eh?

regina. yes.

engstrand. ay, ay; you've picked up some learning out here; and that may
come in useful now, regina.

regina. [after a short silence.] what do you want with me in town?

engstrand. can you ask what a father wants with his only child? a'n't i
a lonely, forlorn widower?

regina. oh, don't try on any nonsense like that with me! why do you want
me?

engstrand. well, let me tell you, i've been thinking of setting up in a
new line of business.

regina. [contemptuously.] you've tried that often enough, and much good
you've done with it.

engstrand. yes, but this time you shall see, regina! devil take me--

regina. [stamps.] stop your swearing!

engstrand. hush, hush; you're right enough there, my girl. what i wanted
to say was just this--i've laid by a very tidy pile from this orphanage
job.

regina. have you? that's a good thing for you.

engstrand. what can a man spend his ha'pence on here in this country
hole?

regina. well, what then?

engstrand. why, you see, i thought of putting the money into some paying
speculation. i thought of a sort of a sailor's tavern--

regina. pah!

engstrand. a regular high-class affair, of course; not any sort of
pig-sty for common sailors. no! damn it! it would be for captains and
mates, and--and--regular swells, you know.

regina. and i was to--?

engstrand. you were to help, to be sure. only for the look of the thing,
you understand. devil a bit of hard work shall you have, my girl. you
shall do exactly what you like.

regina. oh, indeed!

engstrand. but there must be a petticoat in the house; that's as clear
as daylight. for i want to have it a bit lively like in the evenings,
with singing and dancing, and so on. you must remember they're weary
wanderers on the ocean of life. [nearer.] now don't be a fool and
stand in your own light, regina. what's to become of you out here? your
mistress has given you a lot of learning; but what good is that to you?
you're to look after the children at the new orphanage, i hear. is that
the sort of thing for you, eh? are you so dead set on wearing your life
out for a pack of dirty brats?

regina. no; if things go as i want them to--well there's no
saying--there's no saying.

engstrand. what do you mean by "there's no saying"?

regina. never you mind.--how much money have you saved?

engstrand. what with one thing and another, a matter of seven or
eight hundred crowns. [a "krone" is equal to one shilling and
three-halfpence.]

regina. that's not so bad.

engstrand. it's enough to make a start with, my girl.

regina. aren't you thinking of giving me any?

engstrand. no, i'm blest if i am!

regina. not even of sending me a scrap of stuff for a new dress?

engstrand. come to town with me, my lass, and you'll soon get dresses
enough.

regina. pooh! i can do that on my own account, if i want to.

engstrand. no, a father's guiding hand is what you want, regina. now,
i've got my eye on a capital house in little harbour street. they don't
want much ready-money; and it could be a sort of a sailors' home, you
know.

regina. but i will not live with you! i have nothing whatever to do with
you. be off!

engstrand. you wouldn't stop long with me, my girl. no such luck! if
you knew how to play your cards, such a fine figure of a girl as you've
grown in the last year or two--

regina. well?

engstrand. you'd soon get hold of some mate--or maybe even a captain--

regina. i won't marry any one of that sort. sailors have no _savoir
vivre_.

engstrand. what's that they haven't got?

regina. i know what sailors are, i tell you. they're not the sort of
people to marry.

engstrand. then never mind about marrying them. you can make it pay all
the same. [more confidentially.] he--the englishman--the man with the
yacht--he came down with three hundred dollars, he did; and she wasn't a
bit handsomer than you.

regina. [making for him.] out you go!

engstrand. [falling back.] come, come! you're not going to hit me, i
hope.

regina. yes, if you begin talking about mother i shall hit you. get away
with you, i say! [drives him back towards the garden door.] and don't
slam the doors. young mr. alving--

engstrand. he's asleep; i know. you're mightily taken up about young mr.
alving--[more softly.] oho! you don't mean to say it's him as--?

regina. be off this minute! you're crazy, i tell you! no, not that way.
there comes pastor manders. down the kitchen stairs with you.

engstrand. [towards the right.] yes, yes, i'm going. but just you talk
to him as is coming there. he's the man to tell you what a child owes
its father. for i am your father all the same, you know. i can prove it
from the church register.

[he goes out through the second door to the right, which regina has
opened, and closes again after him. regina glances hastily at herself in
the mirror, dusts herself with her pocket handkerchief; and settles her
necktie; then she busies herself with the flowers.]

[pastor manders, wearing an overcoat, carrying an umbrella, and with
a small travelling-bag on a strap over his shoulder, comes through the
garden door into the conservatory.]

manders. good-morning, miss engstrand.

regina. [turning round, surprised and pleased.] no, really! good
morning, pastor manders. is the steamer in already?

manders. it is just in. [enters the sitting-room.] terrible weather we
have been having lately.

regina. [follows him.] it's such blessed weather for the country, sir.

manders. no doubt; you are quite right. we townspeople give too little
thought to that. [he begins to take off his overcoat.]

regina. oh, mayn't i help you?--there! why, how wet it is? i'll just
hang it up in the hall. and your umbrella, too--i'll open it and let it
dry.

[she goes out with the things through the second door on the right.
pastor manders takes off his travelling bag and lays it and his hat on a
chair. meanwhile regina comes in again.]

manders. ah, it's a comfort to get safe under cover. i hope everything
is going on well here?

regina. yes, thank you, sir.

manders. you have your hands full, i suppose, in preparation for
to-morrow?

regina. yes, there's plenty to do, of course.

manders. and mrs. alving is at home, i trust?

regina. oh dear, yes. she's just upstairs, looking after the young
master's chocolate.

manders. yes, by-the-bye--i heard down at the pier that oswald had
arrived.

regina. yes, he came the day before yesterday. we didn't expect him
before to-day.

manders. quite strong and well, i hope?

regina. yes, thank you, quite; but dreadfully tired with the journey. he
has made one rush right through from paris--the whole way in one train,
i believe. he's sleeping a little now, i think; so perhaps we'd better
talk a little quietly.

manders. sh!--as quietly as you please.

regina. [arranging an arm-chair beside the table.] now, do sit down,
pastor manders, and make yourself comfortable. [he sits down; she places
a footstool under his feet.] there! are you comfortable now, sir?

manders. thanks, thanks, extremely so. [looks at her.] do you know, miss
engstrand, i positively believe you have grown since i last saw you.

regina. do you think so, sir? mrs. alving says i've filled out too.

manders. filled out? well, perhaps a little; just enough.

[short pause.]

regina. shall i tell mrs. alving you are here?

manders. thanks, thanks, there is no hurry, my dear child.--by-the-bye,
regina, my good girl, tell me: how is your father getting on out here?

regina. oh, thank you, sir, he's getting on well enough.

manders. he called upon me last time he was in town.

regina. did he, indeed? he's always so glad of a chance of talking to
you, sir.

manders. and you often look in upon him at his work, i daresay?

regina. i? oh, of course, when i have time, i--

manders. your father is not a man of strong character, miss engstrand.
he stands terribly in need of a guiding hand.

regina. oh, yes; i daresay he does.

manders. he requires some one near him whom he cares for, and whose
judgment he respects. he frankly admitted as much when he last came to
see me.

regina. yes, he mentioned something of the sort to me. but i don't know
whether mrs. alving can spare me; especially now that we've got the
new orphanage to attend to. and then i should be so sorry to leave mrs.
alving; she has always been so kind to me.

manders. but a daughter's duty, my good girl--of course, we should first
have to get your mistress's consent.

regina. but i don't know whether it would be quite proper for me, at my
age, to keep house for a single man.

manders. what! my dear miss engstrand! when the man is your own father!

regina. yes, that may be; but all the same--now, if it were in a
thoroughly nice house, and with a real gentleman--

manders. why, my dear regina--

regina.--one i could love and respect, and be a daughter to--

manders. yes, but my dear, good child--

regina. then i should be glad to go to town. it's very lonely out here;
you know yourself, sir, what it is to be alone in the world. and i can
assure you i'm both quick and willing. don't you know of any such place
for me, sir?

manders. i? no, certainly not.

regina. but, dear, dear sir, do remember me if--

manders. [rising.] yes, yes, certainly, miss engstrand.

regina. for if i--

manders. will you be so good as to tell your mistress i am here?

regina. i will, at once, sir. [she goes out to the left.]

manders. [paces the room two or three times, stands a moment in the
background with his hands behind his back, and looks out over the
garden. then he returns to the table, takes up a book, and looks at the
title-page; starts, and looks at several books.] ha--indeed!

[mrs. alving enters by the door on the left; she is followed by regina,
who immediately goes out by the first door on the right.]

mrs. alving. [holds out her hand.] welcome, my dear pastor.

manders. how do you do, mrs. alving? here i am as i promised.

mrs. alving. always punctual to the minute.

manders. you may believe it was not so easy for me to get away. with all
the boards and committees i belong to--

mrs. alving. that makes it all the kinder of you to come so early.
now we can get through our business before dinner. but where is your
portmanteau?

manders. [quickly.] i left it down at the inn. i shall sleep there
to-night.

mrs. alving. [suppressing a smile.] are you really not to be persuaded,
even now, to pass the night under my roof?

manders. no, no, mrs. alving; many thanks. i shall stay at the inn, as
usual. it is so conveniently near the landing-stage.

mrs. alving. well, you must have your own way. but i really should have
thought we two old people--

manders. now you are making fun of me. ah, you're naturally in great
spirits to-day--what with to-morrow's festival and oswald's return.

mrs. alving. yes; you can think what a delight it is to me! it's more
than two years since he was home last. and now he has promised to stay
with me all the winter.

manders. has he really? that is very nice and dutiful of him. for i can
well believe that life in rome and paris has very different attractions
from any we can offer here.

mrs. alving. ah, but here he has his mother, you see. my own darling
boy--he hasn't forgotten his old mother!

manders. it would be grievous indeed, if absence and absorption in art
and that sort of thing were to blunt his natural feelings.

mrs. alving. yes, you may well say so. but there's nothing of that sort
to fear with him. i'm quite curious to see whether you know him again.
he'll be down presently; he's upstairs just now, resting a little on the
sofa. but do sit down, my dear pastor.

manders. thank you. are you quite at liberty--?

mrs. alving. certainly. [she sits by the table.]

manders. very well. then let me show you--[he goes to the chair where
his travelling-bag lies, takes out a packet of papers, sits down on
the opposite side of the table, and tries to find a clear space for
the papers.] now, to begin with, here is--[breaking off.] tell me, mrs.
alving, how do these books come to be here?

mrs. alving. these books? they are books i am reading.

manders. do you read this sort of literature?

mrs. alving. certainly i do.

manders. do you feel better or happier for such reading?

mrs. alving. i feel, so to speak, more secure.

manders. that is strange. how do you mean?

mrs. alving. well, i seem to find explanation and confirmation of all
sorts of things i myself have been thinking. for that is the wonderful
part of it, pastor manders--there is really nothing new in these books,
nothing but what most people think and believe. only most people either
don't formulate it to themselves, or else keep quiet about it.

manders. great heavens! do you really believe that most people--?

mrs. alving. i do, indeed.

manders. but surely not in this country? not here among us?

mrs. alving. yes, certainly; here as elsewhere.

manders. well, i really must say--!

mrs. alving. for the rest, what do you object to in these books?

manders. object to in them? you surely do not suppose that i have
nothing better to do than to study such publications as these?

mrs. alving. that is to say, you know nothing of what you are
condemning?

manders. i have read enough about these writings to disapprove of them.

mrs. alving. yes; but your own judgment--

manders. my dear mrs. alving, there are many occasions in life when one
must rely upon others. things are so ordered in this world; and it is
well that they are. otherwise, what would become of society?

mrs. alving. well, well, i daresay you're right there.

manders. besides, i of course do not deny that there may be much that
is attractive in such books. nor can i blame you for wishing to keep
up with the intellectual movements that are said to be going on in the
great world-where you have let your son pass so much of his life. but--

mrs. alving. but?

manders. [lowering his voice.] but one should not talk about it, mrs.
alving. one is certainly not bound to account to everybody for what one
reads and thinks within one's own four walls.

mrs. alving. of course not; i quite agree with you.

manders. only think, now, how you are bound to consider the interests
of this orphanage, which you decided on founding at a time when--if
i understand you rightly--you thought very differently on spiritual
matters.

mrs. alving. oh, yes; i quite admit that. but it was about the
orphanage--

manders. it was about the orphanage we were to speak; yes. all i say
is: prudence, my dear lady! and now let us get to business. [opens the
packet, and takes out a number of papers.] do you see these?

mrs. alving. the documents?

manders. all--and in perfect order. i can tell you it was hard work to
get them in time. i had to put on strong pressure. the authorities are
almost morbidly scrupulous when there is any decisive step to be taken.
but here they are at last. [looks through the bundle.] see! here is the
formal deed of gift of the parcel of ground known as solvik in the manor
of rosenvold, with all the newly constructed buildings, schoolrooms,
master's house, and chapel. and here is the legal fiat for the endowment
and for the bye-laws of the institution. will you look at them? [reads.]
"bye-laws for the children's home to be known as 'captain alving's
foundation.'"

mrs. alving. (looks long at the paper.) so there it is.

manders. i have chosen the designation "captain" rather than
"chamberlain." "captain" looks less pretentious.

mrs. alving. oh, yes; just as you think best.

manders. and here you have the bank account of the capital lying at
interest to cover the current expenses of the orphanage.

mrs. alving. thank you; but please keep it--it will be more convenient.

manders. with pleasure. i think we will leave the money in the bank for
the present. the interest is certainly not what we could wish--four per
cent. and six months' notice of withdrawal. if a good mortgage could
be found later on--of course it must be a first mortgage and an
unimpeachable security--then we could consider the matter.

mrs. alving. certainly, my dear pastor manders. you are the best judge
in these things.

manders. i will keep my eyes open at any rate.--but now there is one
thing more which i have several times been intending to ask you.

mrs. alving. and what is that?

manders. shall the orphanage buildings be insured or not?

mrs. alving. of course they must be insured.

manders. well, wait a moment, mrs. alving. let us look into the matter a
little more closely.

mrs. alving. i have everything insured; buildings and movables and stock
and crops.

manders. of course you have--on your own estate. and so have i--of
course. but here, you see, it is quite another matter. the orphanage is
to be consecrated, as it were, to a higher purpose.

mrs. alving. yes, but that's no reason--

manders. for my own part, i should certainly not see the smallest
impropriety in guarding against all contingencies--

mrs. alving. no, i should think not.

manders. but what is the general feeling in the neighbourhood? you, of
course, know better than i.

mrs. alving. well--the general feeling--

manders. is there any considerable number of people--really responsible
people--who might be scandalised?

mrs. alving. what do you mean by "really responsible people"?

manders. well, i mean people in such independent and influential
positions that one cannot help attaching some weight to their opinions.

mrs. alving. there are several people of that sort here, who would very
likely be shocked if--

manders. there, you see! in town we have many such people. think of all
my colleague's adherents! people would be only too ready to interpret
our action as a sign that neither you nor i had the right faith in a
higher providence.

mrs. alving. but for your own part, my dear pastor, you can at least
tell yourself that--

manders. yes, i know--i know; my conscience would be quite easy, that
is true enough. but nevertheless we should not escape grave
misinterpretation; and that might very likely react unfavourably upon
the orphanage.

mrs. alving. well, in that case--

manders. nor can i entirely lose sight of the difficult--i may even say
painful--position in which _i_ might perhaps be placed. in the leading
circles of the town, people take a lively interest in this orphanage. it
is, of course, founded partly for the benefit of the town, as well;
and it is to be hoped it will, to a considerable extent, result in
lightening our poor rates. now, as i have been your adviser, and have
had the business arrangements in my hands, i cannot but fear that i may
have to bear the brunt of fanaticism--

mrs. alving. oh, you mustn't run the risk of that.

manders. to say nothing of the attacks that would assuredly be made upon
me in certain papers and periodicals, which--

mrs. alving. enough, my dear pastor manders. that consideration is quite
decisive.

manders. then you do not wish the orphanage to be insured?

mrs. alving. no. we will let it alone.

manders. [leaning back in his chair.] but if, now, a disaster were to
happen? one can never tell--should you be able to make good the damage?

mrs. alving. no; i tell you plainly i should do nothing of the kind.

manders. then i must tell you, mrs. alving--we are taking no small
responsibility upon ourselves.

mrs. alving. do you think we can do otherwise?

manders. no, that is just the point; we really cannot do otherwise. we
ought not to expose ourselves to misinterpretation; and we have no right
whatever to give offence to the weaker brethren.

mrs. alving. you, as a clergyman, certainly should not.

manders. i really think, too, we may trust that such an institution has
fortune on its side; in fact, that it stands under a special providence.

mrs. alving. let us hope so, pastor manders.

manders. then we will let it take its chance?

mrs. alving. yes, certainly.

manders. very well. so be it. [makes a note.] then--no insurance.

mrs. alving. it's odd that you should just happen to mention the matter
to-day--

manders. i have often thought of asking you about it--

mrs. alving.--for we very nearly had a fire down there yesterday.

manders. you don't say so!

mrs. alving. oh, it was a trifling matter. a heap of shavings had caught
fire in the carpenter's workshop.

manders. where engstrand works?

mrs. alving. yes. they say he's often very careless with matches.

manders. he has so much on his mind, that man--so many things to fight
against. thank god, he is now striving to lead a decent life, i hear.

mrs. alving. indeed! who says so?

manders. he himself assures me of it. and he is certainly a capital
workman.

mrs. alving. oh, yes; so long as he's sober--

manders. ah, that melancholy weakness! but, he is often driven to it
by his injured leg, he says. last time he was in town i was really
touched by him. he came and thanked me so warmly for having got him work
here, so that he might be near regina.

mrs. alving. he doesn't see much of her.

manders. oh, yes; he has a talk with her every day. he told me so
himself.

mrs. alving. well, it may be so.

manders. he feels so acutely that he needs some one to keep a firm hold
on him when temptation comes. that is what i cannot help liking about
jacob engstrand: he comes to you so helplessly, accusing himself and
confessing his own weakness. the last time he was talking to me--believe
me, mrs. alving, supposing it were a real necessity for him to have
regina home again--

mrs. alving. [rising hastily.] regina!

manders.--you must not set yourself against it.

mrs. alving. indeed i shall set myself against it. and besides--regina
is to have a position in the orphanage.

manders. but, after all, remember he is her father--

mrs. alving. oh, i know very well what sort of a father he has been to
her. no! she shall never go to him with my goodwill.

manders. [rising.] my dear lady, don't take the matter so warmly. you
sadly misjudge poor engstrand. you seem to be quite terrified--

mrs. alving. [more quietly.] it makes no difference. i have taken regina
into my house, and there she shall stay. [listens.] hush, my dear mr.
manders; say no more about it. [her face lights up with gladness.]
listen! there is oswald coming downstairs. now we'll think of no one but
him.

[oswald alving, in a light overcoat, hat in hand, and smoking a large
meerschaum, enters by the door on the left; he stops in the doorway.]

oswald. oh, i beg your pardon; i thought you were in the study. [comes
forward.] good-morning, pastor manders.

manders. [staring.] ah--! how strange--!

mrs. alving. well now, what do you think of him, mr. manders?

manders. i--i--can it really be--?

oswald. yes, it's really the prodigal son, sir.

manders. [protesting.] my dear young friend--

oswald. well, then, the lost sheep found.

mrs. alving. oswald is thinking of the time when you were so much
opposed to his becoming a painter.

manders. to our human eyes many a step seems dubious, which afterwards
proves--[wrings his hand.] but first of all, welcome, welcome home! do
not think, my dear oswald--i suppose i may call you by your christian
name?

oswald. what else should you call me?

manders. very good. what i wanted to say was this, my dear oswald you
must not think that i utterly condemn the artist's calling. i have no
doubt there are many who can keep their inner self unharmed in that
profession, as in any other.

oswald. let us hope so.

mrs. alving. [beaming with delight.] i know one who has kept both his
inner and his outer self unharmed. just look at him, mr. manders.

oswald. [moves restlessly about the room.] yes, yes, my dear mother;
let's say no more about it.

manders. why, certainly--that is undeniable. and you have begun to make
a name for yourself already. the newspapers have often spoken of you,
most favourably. just lately, by-the-bye, i fancy i haven't seen your
name quite so often.

oswald. [up in the conservatory.] i haven't been able to paint so much
lately.

mrs. alving. even a painter needs a little rest now and then.

manders. no doubt, no doubt. and meanwhile he can be preparing himself
and mustering his forces for some great work.

oswald. yes.--mother, will dinner soon be ready?

mrs. alving. in less than half an hour. he has a capital appetite, thank
god.

manders. and a taste for tobacco, too.

oswald. i found my father's pipe in my room--

manders. aha--then that accounts for it!

mrs. alving. for what?

manders. when oswald appeared there, in the doorway, with the pipe in
his mouth, i could have sworn i saw his father, large as life.

oswald. no, really?

mrs. alving. oh, how can you say so? oswald takes after me.

manders. yes, but there is an expression about the corners of the
mouth--something about the lips--that reminds one exactly of alving: at
any rate, now that he is smoking.

mrs. alving. not in the least. oswald has rather a clerical curve about
his mouth, i think.

manders. yes, yes; some of my colleagues have much the same expression.

mrs. alving. but put your pipe away, my dear boy; i won't have smoking
in here.

oswald. [does so.] by all means. i only wanted to try it; for i once
smoked it when i was a child.

mrs. alving. you?

oswald. yes. i was quite small at the time. i recollect i came up to
father's room one evening when he was in great spirits.

mrs. alving. oh, you can't recollect anything of those times.

oswald. yes, i recollect it distinctly. he took me on his knee, and gave
me the pipe. "smoke, boy," he said; "smoke away, boy!" and i smoked
as hard as i could, until i felt i was growing quite pale, and the
perspiration stood in great drops on my forehead. then he burst out
laughing heartily--

manders. that was most extraordinary.

mrs. alving. my dear friend, it's only something oswald has dreamt.

oswald. no, mother, i assure you i didn't dream it. for--don't you
remember this?--you came and carried me out into the nursery. then i
was sick, and i saw that you were crying.--did father often play such
practical jokes?

manders. in his youth he overflowed with the joy of life--

oswald. and yet he managed to do so much in the world; so much that was
good and useful; although he died so early.

manders. yes, you have inherited the name of an energetic and admirable
man, my dear oswald alving. no doubt it will be an incentive to you--

oswald. it ought to, indeed.

manders. it was good of you to come home for the ceremony in his honour.

oswald. i could do no less for my father.

mrs. alving. and i am to keep him so long! that is the best of all.

manders. you are going to pass the winter at home, i hear.

oswald. my stay is indefinite, sir. but, ah! it is good to be at home!

mrs. alving. [beaming.] yes, isn't it, dear?

manders. [looking sympathetically at him.] you went out into the world
early, my dear oswald.

oswald. i did. i sometimes wonder whether it wasn't too early.

mrs. alving. oh, not at all. a healthy lad is all the better for it;
especially when he's an only child. he oughtn't to hang on at home with
his mother and father, and get spoilt.

manders. that is a very disputable point, mrs. alving. a child's proper
place is, and must be, the home of his fathers.

oswald. there i quite agree with you, pastor manders.

manders. only look at your own son--there is no reason why we should not
say it in his presence--what has the consequence been for him? he is six
or seven and twenty, and has never had the opportunity of learning what
a well-ordered home really is.

oswald. i beg your pardon, pastor; there you're quite mistaken.

manders. indeed? i thought you had lived almost exclusively in artistic
circles.

oswald. so i have.

manders. and chiefly among the younger artists?

oswald. yes, certainly.

manders. but i thought few of those young fellows could afford to set up
house and support a family.

oswald. there are many who cannot afford to marry, sir.

manders. yes, that is just what i say.

oswald. but they may have a home for all that. and several of them have,
as a matter of fact; and very pleasant, well-ordered homes they are,
too.

[mrs. alving follows with breathless interest; nods, but says nothing.]

manders. but i'm not talking of bachelors' quarters. by a "home" i
understand the home of a family, where a man lives with his wife and
children.

oswald. yes; or with his children and his children's mother.

manders. [starts; clasps his hands.] but, good heavens--

oswald. well?

manders. lives with--his children's mother!

oswald. yes. would you have him turn his children's mother out of doors?

manders. then it is illicit relations you are talking of! irregular
marriages, as people call them!

oswald. i have never noticed anything particularly irregular about the
life these people lead.

manders. but how is it possible that a--a young man or young woman with
any decency of feeling can endure to live in that way?--in the eyes of
all the world!

oswald. what are they to do? a poor young artist--a poor girl--marriage
costs a great deal. what are they to do?

manders. what are they to do? let me tell you, mr. alving, what they
ought to do. they ought to exercise self-restraint from the first; that
is what they ought to do.

oswald. that doctrine will scarcely go down with warm-blooded young
people who love each other.

mrs. alving. no, scarcely!

manders. [continuing.] how can the authorities tolerate such things!
allow them to go on in the light of day! [confronting mrs. alving.] had
i not cause to be deeply concerned about your son? in circles where open
immorality prevails, and has even a sort of recognised position--!

oswald. let me tell you, sir, that i have been in the habit of spending
nearly all my sundays in one or two such irregular homes--

manders. sunday of all days!

oswald. isn't that the day to enjoy one's self? well, never have i heard
an offensive word, and still less have i witnessed anything that could
be called immoral. no; do you know when and where i have come across
immorality in artistic circles?

manders. no, thank heaven, i don't!

oswald. well, then, allow me to inform you. i have met with it when one
or other of our pattern husbands and fathers has come to paris to have
a look round on his own account, and has done the artists the honour of
visiting their humble haunts. they knew what was what. these gentlemen
could tell us all about places and things we had never dreamt of.

manders. what! do you mean to say that respectable men from home here
would--?

oswald. have you never heard these respectable men, when they got home
again, talking about the way in which immorality runs rampant abroad?

manders. yes, no doubt--

mrs. alving. i have too.

oswald. well, you may take their word for it. they know what they are
talking about! [presses his hands to his head.] oh! that that great,
free, glorious life out there should be defiled in such a way!

mrs. alving. you mustn't get excited, oswald. it's not good for you.

oswald. yes; you're quite right, mother. it's bad for me, i know.
you see, i'm wretchedly worn out. i shall go for a little turn before
dinner. excuse me, pastor: i know you can't take my point of view; but
i couldn't help speaking out. [he goes out by the second door to the
right.]

mrs. alving. my poor boy!

manders. you may well say so. then this is what he has come to!

[mrs. alving looks at him silently.]

manders. [walking up and down.] he called himself the prodigal son.
alas! alas!

[mrs. alving continues looking at him.]

manders. and what do you say to all this?

mrs. alving. i say that oswald was right in every word.

manders. [stands still.] right? right! in such principles?

mrs. alving. here, in my loneliness, i have come to the same way of
thinking, pastor manders. but i have never dared to say anything. well!
now my boy shall speak for me.

manders. you are greatly to be pitied, mrs. alving. but now i must speak
seriously to you. and now it is no longer your business manager and
adviser, your own and your husband's early friend, who stands before
you. it is the priest--the priest who stood before you in the moment of
your life when you had gone farthest astray.

mrs. alving. and what has the priest to say to me?

manders. i will first stir up your memory a little. the moment is well
chosen. to-morrow will be the tenth anniversary of your husband's death.
to-morrow the memorial in his honour will be unveiled. to-morrow i shall
have to speak to the whole assembled multitude. but to-day i will speak
to you alone.

mrs. alving. very well, pastor manders. speak.

manders. do you remember that after less than a year of married life you
stood on the verge of an abyss? that you forsook your house and home?
that you fled from your husband? yes, mrs. alving--fled, fled, and
refused to return to him, however much he begged and prayed you?

mrs. alving. have you forgotten how infinitely miserable i was in that
first year?

manders. it is the very mark of the spirit of rebellion to crave for
happiness in this life. what right have we human beings to happiness?
we have simply to do our duty, mrs. alving! and your duty was to hold
firmly to the man you had once chosen, and to whom you were bound by the
holiest ties.

mrs. alving. you know very well what sort of life alving was
leading--what excesses he was guilty of.

manders. i know very well what rumours there were about him; and i am
the last to approve the life he led in his young days, if report did not
wrong him. but a wife is not appointed to be her husband's judge. it was
your duty to bear with humility the cross which a higher power had, in
its wisdom, laid upon you. but instead of that you rebelliously throw
away the cross, desert the backslider whom you should have supported, go
and risk your good name and reputation, and--nearly succeed in ruining
other people's reputation into the bargain.

mrs. alving. other people's? one other person's, you mean.

manders. it was incredibly reckless of you to seek refuge with me.

mrs. alving. with our clergyman? with our intimate friend?

manders. just on that account. yes, you may thank god that i possessed
the necessary firmness; that i succeeded in dissuading you from your
wild designs; and that it was vouchsafed me to lead you back to the path
of duty, and home to your lawful husband.

mrs. alving. yes, pastor manders, that was certainly your work.

manders. i was but a poor instrument in a higher hand. and what a
blessing has it not proved to you, all the days of your life, that i
induced you to resume the yoke of duty and obedience! did not everything
happen as i foretold? did not alving turn his back on his errors, as
a man should? did he not live with you from that time, lovingly and
blamelessly, all his days? did he not become a benefactor to the whole
district? and did he not help you to rise to his own level, so that you,
little by little, became his assistant in all his undertakings? and a
capital assistant, too--oh, i know, mrs. alving, that praise is due to
you.--but now i come to the next great error in your life.

mrs. alving. what do you mean?

manders. just as you once disowned a wife's duty, so you have since
disowned a mother's.

mrs. alving. ah--!

manders. you have been all your life under the dominion of a pestilent
spirit of self-will. the whole bias of your mind has been towards
insubordination and lawlessness. you have never known how to endure any
bond. everything that has weighed upon you in life you have cast away
without care or conscience, like a burden you were free to throw off at
will. it did not please you to be a wife any longer, and you left your
husband. you found it troublesome to be a mother, and you sent your
child forth among strangers.

mrs. alving. yes, that is true. i did so.

manders. and thus you have become a stranger to him.

mrs. alving. no! no! i am not.

manders. yes, you are; you must be. and in what state of mind has he
returned to you? bethink yourself well, mrs. alving. you sinned greatly
against your husband;--that you recognise by raising yonder memorial to
him. recognise now, also, how you have sinned against your son--there
may yet be time to lead him back from the paths of error. turn back
yourself, and save what may yet be saved in him. for [with uplifted
forefinger] verily, mrs. alving, you are a guilt-laden mother! this i
have thought it my duty to say to you.

[silence.]

mrs. alving. [slowly and with self-control.] you have now spoken out,
pastor manders; and to-morrow you are to speak publicly in memory of my
husband. i shall not speak to-morrow. but now i will speak frankly to
you, as you have spoken to me.

manders. to be sure; you will plead excuses for your conduct--

mrs. alving. no. i will only tell you a story.

manders. well--?

mrs. alving. all that you have just said about my husband and me, and
our life after you had brought me back to the path of duty--as you
called it--about all that you know nothing from personal observation.
from that moment you, who had been our intimate friend, never set foot
in our house gain.

manders. you and your husband left the town immediately after.

mrs. alving. yes; and in my husband's lifetime you never came to see
us. it was business that forced you to visit me when you undertook the
affairs of the orphanage.

manders. [softly and hesitatingly.] helen--if that is meant as a
reproach, i would beg you to bear in mind--

mrs. alving.--the regard you owed to your position, yes; and that i was
a runaway wife. one can never be too cautious with such unprincipled
creatures.

manders. my dear--mrs. alving, you know that is an absurd exaggeration--

mrs. alving. well well, suppose it is. my point is that your judgment
as to my married life is founded upon nothing but common knowledge and
report.

manders. i admit that. what then?

mrs. alving. well, then, pastor manders--i will tell you the truth. i
have sworn to myself that one day you should know it--you alone!

manders. what is the truth, then?

mrs. alving. the truth is that my husband died just as dissolute as he
had lived all his days.

manders. [feeling after a chair.] what do you say?

mrs. alving. after nineteen years of marriage, as dissolute--in his
desires at any rate--as he was before you married us.

manders. and those-those wild oats--those irregularities--those
excesses, if you like--you call "a dissolute life"?

mrs. alving. our doctor used the expression.

manders. i do not understand you.

mrs. alving. you need not.

manders. it almost makes me dizzy. your whole married life, the seeming
union of all these years, was nothing more than a hidden abyss!

mrs. alving. neither more nor less. now you know it.

manders. this is--this is inconceivable to me. i cannot grasp it! i
cannot realise it! but how was it possible to--? how could such a state
of things be kept secret?

mrs. alving. that has been my ceaseless struggle, day after day. after
oswald's birth, i thought alving seemed to be a little better. but it
did not last long. and then i had to struggle twice as hard, fighting as
though for life or death, so that nobody should know what sort of man
my child's father was. and you know what power alving had of winning
people's hearts. nobody seemed able to believe anything but good of
him. he was one of those people whose life does not bite upon their
reputation. but at last, mr. manders--for you must know the whole
story--the most repulsive thing of all happened.

manders. more repulsive than what you have told me?

mrs. alving. i had gone on bearing with him, although i knew very well
the secrets of his life out of doors. but when he brought the scandal
within our own walls--

manders. impossible! here!

mrs. alving. yes; here in our own home. it was there [pointing towards
the first door on the right], in the dining-room, that i first came
to know of it. i was busy with something in there, and the door was
standing ajar. i heard our housemaid come up from the garden, with water
for those flowers.

manders. well--?

mrs. alving. soon after, i heard alving come in too. i heard him say
something softly to her. and then i heard--[with a short laugh]--oh! it
still sounds in my ears, so hateful and yet so ludicrous--i heard my own
servant-maid whisper, "let me go, mr. alving! let me be!"

manders. what unseemly levity on his part! but it cannot have been more
than levity, mrs. alving; believe me, it cannot.

mrs. alving. i soon knew what to believe. mr. alving had his way with
the girl; and that connection had consequences, mr. manders.

manders. [as though petrified.] such things in this house--in this
house!

mrs. alving. i had borne a great deal in this house. to keep him at home
in the evenings, and at night, i had to make myself his boon companion
in his secret orgies up in his room. there i have had to sit alone with
him, to clink glasses and drink with him, and to listen to his ribald,
silly talk. i have had to fight with him to get him dragged to bed--

manders. [moved.] and you were able to bear all this!

mrs. alving. i had to bear it for my little boy's sake. but when the
last insult was added; when my own servant-maid--; then i swore to
myself: this shall come to an end! and so i took the reins into my own
hand--the whole control--over him and everything else. for now i had a
weapon against him, you see; he dared not oppose me. it was then i sent
oswald away from home. he was nearly seven years old, and was beginning
to observe and ask questions, as children do. that i could not bear. it
seemed to me the child must be poisoned by merely breathing the air of
this polluted home. that was why i sent him away. and now you can see,
too, why he was never allowed to set foot inside his home so long as his
father lived. no one knows what that cost me.

manders. you have indeed had a life of trial.

mrs. alving. i could never have borne it if i had not had my work. for
i may truly say that i have worked! all the additions to the estate--all
the improvements--all the labour-saving appliances, that alving was so
much praised for having introduced--do you suppose he had energy for
anything of the sort?--he, who lay all day on the sofa, reading an old
court guide! no; but i may tell you this too: when he had his better
intervals, it was i who urged him on; it was i who had to drag the
whole load when he relapsed into his evil ways, or sank into querulous
wretchedness.

manders. and it is to this man that you raise a memorial?

mrs. alving. there you see the power of an evil conscience.

manders. evil--? what do you mean?

mrs. alving. it always seemed to me impossible but that the truth must
come out and be believed. so the orphanage was to deaden all rumours and
set every doubt at rest.

manders. in that you have certainly not missed your aim, mrs. alving.

mrs. alving. and besides, i had one other reason. i was determined that
oswald, my own boy, should inherit nothing whatever from his father.

manders. then it is alving's fortune that--?

mrs. alving. yes. the sums i have spent upon the orphanage, year by
year, make up the amount--i have reckoned it up precisely--the amount
which made lieutenant alving "a good match" in his day.

manders. i don't understand--

mrs. alving. it was my purchase-money. i do not choose that that money
should pass into oswald's hands. my son shall have everything from
me--everything.

[oswald alving enters through the second door to the right; he has taken
of his hat and overcoat in the hall.]

mrs. alving. [going towards him.] are you back again already? my dear,
dear boy!

oswald. yes. what can a fellow do out of doors in this eternal rain? but
i hear dinner is ready. that's capital!

regina. [with a parcel, from the dining-room.] a parcel has come for
you, mrs. alving. [hands it to her.]

mrs. alving. [with a glance at mr. manders.] no doubt copies of the ode
for to-morrow's ceremony.

manders. h'm--

regina. and dinner is ready.

mrs. alving. very well. we will come directly. i will just--[begins to
open the parcel.]

regina. [to oswald.] would mr. alving like red or white wine?

oswald. both, if you please.

regina. _bien_. very well, sir. [she goes into the dining-room.]

oswald. i may as well help to uncork it. [he also goes into the dining
room, the door of which swings half open behind him.]

mrs. alving. [who has opened the parcel.] yes, i thought so. here is the
ceremonial ode, pastor manders.

manders. [with folded hands.] with what countenance i am to deliver my
discourse to-morrow--!

mrs. alving. oh, you will get through it somehow.

manders. [softly, so as not to be heard in the dining-room.] yes; it
would not do to provoke scandal.

mrs. alving. [under her breath, but firmly.] no. but then this long,
hateful comedy will be ended. from the day after to-morrow, i shall act
in every way as though he who is dead had never lived in this house.
there shall be no one here but my boy and his mother.

[from the dining-room comes the noise of a chair overturned, and at the
same moment is heard:]

regina. [sharply, but in a whisper.] oswald! take care! are you mad? let
me go!

mrs. alving. [starts in terror.] ah--!

[she stares wildly towards the half-open door. oswald is heard laughing
and humming. a bottle is uncorked.]

manders. [agitated.] what can be the matter? what is it, mrs. alving?

mrs. alving. [hoarsely.] ghosts! the couple from the conservatory--risen
again!

manders. is it possible! regina--? is she--?

mrs. alving. yes. come. not a word--!

[she seizes pastor manders by the arm, and walks unsteadily towards the
dining-room.]




act second.

[the same room. the mist still lies heavy over the landscape.]

[manders and mrs. alving enter from the dining-room.]

mrs. alving. [still in the doorway.] _velbekomme_ [note: a phrase
equivalent to the german _prosit die mahlzeit_--may good digestion wait
on appetite.], mr. manders. [turns back towards the dining-room.] aren't
you coming too, oswald?

oswald. [from within.] no, thank you. i think i shall go out a little.

mrs. alving. yes, do. the weather seems a little brighter now. [she
shuts the dining-room door, goes to the hall door, and calls:] regina!

regina. [outside.] yes, mrs. alving?

mrs. alving. go down to the laundry, and help with the garlands.

regina. yes, mrs. alving.

[mrs. alving assures herself that regina goes; then shuts the door.]

manders. i suppose he cannot overhear us in there?

mrs. alving. not when the door is shut. besides, he's just going out.

manders. i am still quite upset. i don't know how i could swallow a
morsel of dinner.

mrs. alving. [controlling her nervousness, walks up and down.] nor i.
but what is to be done now?

manders. yes; what is to be done? i am really quite at a loss. i am so
utterly without experience in matters of this sort.

mrs. alving. i feel sure that, so far, no mischief has been done.

manders. no; heaven forbid! but it is an unseemly state of things,
nevertheless.

mrs. alving. it is only an idle fancy on oswald's part; you may be sure
of that.

manders. well, as i say, i am not accustomed to affairs of the kind. but
i should certainly think--

mrs. alving. out of the house she must go, and that immediately. that is
as clear as daylight--

manders. yes, of course she must.

mrs. alving. but where to? it would not be right to--

manders. where to? home to her father, of course.

mrs. alving. to whom did you say?

manders. to her--but then, engstrand is not--? good god, mrs. alving,
it's impossible! you must be mistaken after all.

mrs. alving. unfortunately there is no possibility of mistake. johanna
confessed everything to me; and alving could not deny it. so there was
nothing to be done but to get the matter hushed up.

manders. no, you could do nothing else.

mrs. alving. the girl left our service at once, and got a good sum of
money to hold her tongue for the time. the rest she managed for herself
when she got to town. she renewed her old acquaintance with engstrand,
no doubt let him see that she had money in her purse, and told him some
tale about a foreigner who put in here with a yacht that summer. so she
and engstrand got married in hot haste. why, you married them yourself.

manders. but then how to account for--? i recollect distinctly engstrand
coming to give notice of the marriage. he was quite overwhelmed with
contrition, and bitterly reproached himself for the misbehaviour he and
his sweetheart had been guilty of.

mrs. alving. yes; of course he had to take the blame upon himself.

manders. but such a piece of duplicity on his part! and towards me too!
i never could have believed it of jacob engstrand. i shall not fail
to take him seriously to task; he may be sure of that.--and then the
immorality of such a connection! for money--! how much did the girl
receive?

mrs. alving. three hundred dollars.

manders. just think of it--for a miserable three hundred dollars, to go
and marry a fallen woman!

mrs. alving. then what have you to say of me? i went and married a
fallen man.

manders. why--good heavens!--what are you talking about! a fallen man!

mrs. alving. do you think alving was any purer when i went with him to
the altar than johanna was when engstrand married her?

manders. well, but there is a world of difference between the two
cases--

mrs. alving. not so much difference after all--except in the price:--a
miserable three hundred dollars and a whole fortune.

manders. how can you compare such absolutely dissimilar cases? you had
taken counsel with your own heart and with your natural advisers.

mrs. alving. [without looking at him.] i thought you understood where
what you call my heart had strayed to at the time.

manders. [distantly.] had i understood anything of the kind, i should
not have been a daily guest in your husband's house.

mrs. alving. at any rate, the fact remains that with myself i took no
counsel whatever.

manders. well then, with your nearest relatives--as your duty bade
you--with your mother and your two aunts.

mrs. alving. yes, that is true. those three cast up the account for me.
oh, it's marvellous how clearly they made out that it would be downright
madness to refuse such an offer. if mother could only see me now, and
know what all that grandeur has come to!

manders. nobody can be held responsible for the result. this, at least,
remains clear: your marriage was in full accordance with law and order.

mrs. alving. [at the window.] oh, that perpetual law and order! i often
think that is what does all the mischief in this world of ours.

manders. mrs. alving, that is a sinful way of talking.

mrs. alving. well, i can't help it; i must have done with all this
constraint and insincerity. i can endure it no longer. i must work my
way out to freedom.

manders. what do you mean by that?

mrs. alving. [drumming on the window frame.] i ought never to have
concealed the facts of alving's life. but at that time i dared not
do anything else--i was afraid, partly on my own account. i was such a
coward.

manders. a coward?

mrs. alving. if people had come to know anything, they would have
said--"poor man! with a runaway wife, no wonder he kicks over the
traces."

manders. such remarks might have been made with a certain show of right.

mrs. alving. [looking steadily at him.] if i were what i ought to be, i
should go to oswald and say, "listen, my boy: your father led a vicious
life--"

manders. merciful heavens--!

mrs. alving.--and then i should tell him all i have told you--every word
of it.

manders. you shock me unspeakably, mrs. alving.

mrs. alving. yes; i know that. i know that very well. i myself am
shocked at the idea. [goes away from the window.] i am such a coward.

manders. you call it "cowardice" to do your plain duty? have you
forgotten that a son ought to love and honour his father and mother?

mrs. alving. do not let us talk in such general terms. let us ask: ought
oswald to love and honour chamberlain alving?

manders. is there no voice in your mother's heart that forbids you to
destroy your son's ideals?

mrs. alving. but what about the truth?

manders. but what about the ideals?

mrs. alving. oh--ideals, ideals! if only i were not such a coward!

manders. do not despise ideals, mrs. alving; they will avenge themselves
cruelly. take oswald's case: he, unfortunately, seems to have few enough
ideals as it is; but i can see that his father stands before him as an
ideal.

mrs. alving. yes, that is true.

manders. and this habit of mind you have yourself implanted and fostered
by your letters.

mrs. alving. yes; in my superstitious awe for duty and the proprieties,
i lied to my boy, year after year. oh, what a coward--what a coward i
have been!

manders. you have established a happy illusion in your son's heart, mrs.
alving; and assuredly you ought not to undervalue it.

mrs. alving. h'm; who knows whether it is so happy after all--? but, at
any rate, i will not have any tampering with regina. he shall not go and
wreck the poor girl's life.

manders. no; good god--that would be terrible!

mrs. alving. if i knew he was in earnest, and that it would be for his
happiness--

manders. what? what then?

mrs. alving. but it couldn't be; for unfortunately regina is not the
right sort of woman.

manders. well, what then? what do you mean?

mrs. alving. if i weren't such a pitiful coward, i should say to him,
"marry her, or make what arrangement you please, only let us have
nothing underhand about it."

manders. merciful heavens, would you let them marry! anything so
dreadful--! so unheard of--

mrs. alving. do you really mean "unheard of"? frankly, pastor manders,
do you suppose that throughout the country there are not plenty of
married couples as closely akin as they?

manders. i don't in the least understand you.

mrs. alving. oh yes, indeed you do.

manders. ah, you are thinking of the possibility that--alas! yes, family
life is certainly not always so pure as it ought to be. but in such a
case as you point to, one can never know--at least with any certainty.
here, on the other hand--that you, a mother, can think of letting your
son--

mrs. alving. but i cannot--i wouldn't for anything in the world; that is
precisely what i am saying.

manders. no, because you are a "coward," as you put it. but if you were
not a "coward," then--? good god! a connection so shocking!

mrs. alving. so far as that goes, they say we are all sprung from
connections of that sort. and who is it that arranged the world so,
pastor manders?

manders. questions of that kind i must decline to discuss with you, mrs.
alving; you are far from being in the right frame of mind for them. but
that you dare to call your scruples "cowardly"--!

mrs. alving. let me tell you what i mean. i am timid and faint-hearted
because of the ghosts that hang about me, and that i can never quite
shake off.

manders. what do you say hangs about you?

mrs. alving. ghosts! when i heard regina and oswald in there, it was
as though ghosts rose up before me. but i almost think we are all of us
ghosts, pastor manders. it is not only what we have inherited from our
father and mother that "walks" in us. it is all sorts of dead ideas,
and lifeless old beliefs, and so forth. they have no vitality, but they
cling to us all the same, and we cannot shake them off. whenever i take
up a newspaper, i seem to see ghosts gliding between the lines. there
must be ghosts all the country over, as thick as the sands of the sea.
and then we are, one and all, so pitifully afraid of the light.

manders. aha--here we have the fruits of your reading. and pretty fruits
they are, upon my word! oh, those horrible, revolutionary, free-thinking
books!

mrs. alving. you are mistaken, my dear pastor. it was you yourself who
set me thinking; and i thank you for it with all my heart.

manders. i!

mrs. alving. yes--when you forced me under the yoke of what you called
duty and obligation; when you lauded as right and proper what my whole
soul rebelled against as something loathsome. it was then that i began
to look into the seams of your doctrines. i wanted only to pick at a
single knot; but when i had got that undone, the whole thing ravelled
out. and then i understood that it was all machine-sewn.

manders. [softly, with emotion.] and was that the upshot of my life's
hardest battle?

mrs. alving. call it rather your most pitiful defeat.

manders. it was my greatest victory, helen--the victory over myself.

mrs. alving. it was a crime against us both.

manders. when you went astray, and came to me crying, "here i am; take
me!" i commanded you, saying, "woman, go home to your lawful husband."
was that a crime?

mrs. alving. yes, i think so.

manders. we two do not understand each other.

mrs. alving. not now, at any rate.

manders. never--never in my most secret thoughts have i regarded you
otherwise than as another's wife.

mrs. alving. oh--indeed?

manders. helen--!

mrs. alving. people so easily forget their past selves.

manders. i do not. i am what i always was.

mrs. alving. [changing the subject.] well well well; don't let us talk
of old times any longer. you are now over head and ears in boards and
committees, and i am fighting my battle with ghosts, both within me and
without.

manders. those without i shall help you to lay. after all the terrible
things i have heard from you today, i cannot in conscience permit an
unprotected girl to remain in your house.

mrs. alving. don't you think the best plan would be to get her provided
for?--i mean, by a good marriage.

manders. no doubt. i think it would be desirable for her in every
respect. regina is now at the age when--of course i don't know much
about these things, but--

mrs. alving. regina matured very early.

manders. yes, i thought so. i have an impression that she was remarkably
well developed, physically, when i prepared her for confirmation. but in
the meantime, she ought to be at home, under her father's eye--ah! but
engstrand is not--that he--that he--could so hide the truth from me! [a
knock at the door into the hall.]

mrs. alving. who can this be? come in!

engstrand. [in his sunday clothes, in the doorway.] i humbly beg your
pardon, but--

manders. aha! h'm--

mrs. alving. is that you, engstrand?

engstrand.--there was none of the servants about, so i took the great
liberty of just knocking.

mrs. alving. oh, very well. come in. do you want to speak to me?

engstrand. [comes in.] no, i'm obliged to you, ma'am; it was with his
reverence i wanted to have a word or two.

manders. [walking up and down the room.] ah--indeed! you want to speak
to me, do you?

engstrand. yes, i'd like so terrible much to--

manders. [stops in front of him.] well; may i ask what you want?

engstrand. well, it was just this, your reverence: we've been paid off
down yonder--my grateful thanks to you, ma'am,--and now everything's
finished, i've been thinking it would be but right and proper if we,
that have been working so honestly together all this time--well, i was
thinking we ought to end up with a little prayer-meeting to-night.

manders. a prayer-meeting? down at the orphanage?

engstrand. oh, if your reverence doesn't think it proper--

manders. oh yes, i do; but--h'm--

engstrand. i've been in the habit of offering up a little prayer in the
evenings, myself--

mrs. alving. have you?

engstrand. yes, every now and then just a little edification, in a
manner of speaking. but i'm a poor, common man, and have little enough
gift, god help me!--and so i thought, as the reverend mr. manders
happened to be here, i'd--

manders. well, you see, engstrand, i have a question to put to you
first. are you in the right frame of mind for such a meeting! do you
feel your conscience clear and at ease?

engstrand. oh, god help us, your reverence! we'd better not talk about
conscience.

manders. yes, that is just what we must talk about. what have you to
answer?

engstrand. why--a man's conscience--it can be bad enough now and then.

manders. ah, you admit that. then perhaps you will make a clean breast
of it, and tell me--the real truth about regina?

mrs. alving. [quickly.] mr. manders!

manders. [reassuringly.] please allow me--

engstrand. about regina! lord, what a turn you gave me! [looks at mrs.
alving.] there's nothing wrong about regina, is there?

manders. we will hope not. but i mean, what is the truth about you and
regina? you pass for her father, eh!

engstrand. [uncertain.] well--h'm--your reverence knows all about me and
poor johanna.

manders. come now, no more prevarication! your wife told mrs. alving the
whole story before quitting her service.

engstrand. well, then, may--! now, did she really?

manders. you see we know you now, engstrand.

engstrand. and she swore and took her bible oath--

manders. did she take her bible oath?

engstrand. no; she only swore; but she did it that solemn-like.

manders. and you have hidden the truth from me all these years? hidden
it from me, who have trusted you without reserve, in everything.

engstrand. well, i can't deny it.

manders. have i deserved this of you, engstrand? have i not always been
ready to help you in word and deed, so far as it lay in my power? answer
me. have i not?

engstrand. it would have been a poor look-out for me many a time but for
the reverend mr. manders.

manders. and this is how you reward me! you cause me to enter falsehoods
in the church register, and you withhold from me, year after year, the
explanations you owed alike to me and to the truth. your conduct has
been wholly inexcusable, engstrand; and from this time forward i have
done with you!

engstrand. [with a sigh.] yes! i suppose there's no help for it.

manders. how can you possibly justify yourself?

engstrand. who could ever have thought she'd have gone and made bad
worse by talking about it? will your reverence just fancy yourself in
the same trouble as poor johanna--

manders. i!

engstrand. lord bless you, i don't mean just exactly the same. but i
mean, if your reverence had anything to be ashamed of in the eyes of the
world, as the saying goes. we menfolk oughtn't to judge a poor woman too
hardly, your reverence.

manders. i am not doing so. it is you i am reproaching.

engstrand. might i make so bold as to ask your reverence a bit of a
question?

manders. yes, if you want to.

engstrand. isn't it right and proper for a man to raise up the fallen?

manders. most certainly it is.

engstrand. and isn't a man bound to keep his sacred word?

manders. why, of course he is; but--

engstrand. when johanna had got into trouble through that englishman--or
it might have been an american or a russian, as they call them--well,
you see, she came down into the town. poor thing, she'd sent me about
my business once or twice before: for she couldn't bear the sight of
anything as wasn't handsome; and i'd got this damaged leg of mine. your
reverence recollects how i ventured up into a dancing saloon, where
seafaring men was carrying on with drink and devilry, as the saying
goes. and then, when i was for giving them a bit of an admonition to
lead a new life--

mrs. alving. [at the window.] h'm--

manders. i know all about that, engstrand; the ruffians threw you
downstairs. you have told me of the affair already. your infirmity is an
honour to you.

engstrand. i'm not puffed up about it, your reverence. but what i wanted
to say was, that when she came and confessed all to me, with weeping and
gnashing of teeth, i can tell your reverence i was sore at heart to hear
it.

manders. were you indeed, engstrand? well, go on.

engstrand. so i says to her, "the american, he's sailing about on the
boundless sea. and as for you, johanna," says i, "you've committed a
grievous sin, and you're a fallen creature. but jacob engstrand,"
says i, "he's got two good legs to stand upon, he has--" you see, your
reverence, i was speaking figurative-like.

manders. i understand quite well. go on.

engstrand. well, that was how i raised her up and made an honest woman
of her, so as folks shouldn't get to know how as she'd gone astray with
foreigners.

manders. in all that you acted very well. only i cannot approve of your
stooping to take money--

engstrand. money? i? not a farthing!

manders. [inquiringly to mrs. alving.] but--

engstrand. oh, wait a minute!--now i recollect. johanna did have a
trifle of money. but i would have nothing to do with that. "no," says i,
"that's mammon; that's the wages of sin. this dirty gold--or notes, or
whatever it was--we'll just flint, that back in the american's face,"
says i. but he was off and away, over the stormy sea, your reverence.

manders. was he really, my good fellow?

engstrand. he was indeed, sir. so johanna and i, we agreed that the
money should go to the child's education; and so it did, and i can
account for every blessed farthing of it.

manders. why, this alters the case considerably.

engstrand. that's just how it stands, your reverence. and i make so bold
as to say as i've been an honest father to regina, so far as my poor
strength went; for i'm but a weak vessel, worse luck!

manders. well, well, my good fellow--

engstrand. all the same, i bear myself witness as i've brought up the
child, and lived kindly with poor johanna, and ruled over my own house,
as the scripture has it. but it couldn't never enter my head to go to
your reverence and puff myself up and boast because even the likes of
me had done some good in the world. no, sir; when anything of that
sort happens to jacob engstrand, he holds his tongue about it. it don't
happen so terrible often, i daresay. and when i do come to see your
reverence, i find a mortal deal that's wicked and weak to talk about.
for i said it before, and i says it again--a man's conscience isn't
always as clean as it might be.

manders. give me your hand, jacob engstrand.

engstrand. oh, lord! your reverence--

manders. come, no nonsense [wrings his hand]. there we are!

engstrand. and if i might humbly beg your reverence's pardon--

manders. you? on the contrary, it is i who ought to beg your pardon--

engstrand. lord, no, sir!

manders. yes, assuredly. and i do it with all my heart. forgive me for
misunderstanding you. i only wish i could give you some proof of my
hearty regret, and of my good-will towards you--

engstrand. would your reverence do it?

manders. with the greatest pleasure.

engstrand. well then, here's the very chance. with the bit of money i've
saved here, i was thinking i might set up a sailors' home down in the
town.

mrs. alving. you?

engstrand. yes; it might be a sort of orphanage, too, in a manner of
speaking. there's such a many temptations for seafaring folk ashore. but
in this home of mine, a man might feel like as he was under a father's
eye, i was thinking.

manders. what do you say to this, mrs. alving?

engstrand. it isn't much as i've got to start with, lord help me! but if
i could only find a helping hand, why--

manders. yes, yes; we will look into the matter more closely. i entirely
approve of your plan. but now, go before me and make everything
ready, and get the candles lighted, so as to give the place an air of
festivity. and then we will pass an edifying hour together, my good
fellow; for now i quite believe you are in the right frame of mind.

engstrand. yes, i trust i am. and so i'll say good-bye, ma'am, and thank
you kindly; and take good care of regina for me--[wipes a tear from his
eye]--poor johanna's child. well, it's a queer thing, now; but it's just
like as if she'd growd into the very apple of my eye. it is, indeed. [he
bows and goes out through the hall.]

manders. well, what do you say of that man now, mrs. alving? that was a
very different account of matters, was it not?

mrs. alving. yes, it certainly was.

manders. it only shows how excessively careful one ought to be in
judging one's fellow creatures. but what a heartfelt joy it is to
ascertain that one has been mistaken! don't you think so?

mrs. alving. i think you are, and will always be, a great baby, manders.

manders. i?

mrs. alving. [laying her two hands upon his shoulders.] and i say that i
have half a mind to put my arms round your neck, and kiss you.

manders. [stepping hastily back.] no, no! god bless me! what an idea!

mrs. alving. [with a smile.] oh, you needn't be afraid of me.

manders. [by the table.] you have sometimes such an exaggerated way of
expressing yourself. now, let me just collect all the documents, and put
them in my bag. [he does so.] there, that's all right. and now, good-bye
for the present. keep your eyes open when oswald comes back. i shall
look in again later. [he takes his hat and goes out through the hall
door.]

mrs. alving. [sighs, looks for a moment out of the window, sets the room
in order a little, and is about to go into the dining-room, but stops at
the door with a half-suppressed cry.] oswald, are you still at table?

oswald. [in the dining room.] i'm only finishing my cigar.

mrs. alving. i thought you had gone for a little walk.

oswald. in such weather as this?

[a glass clinks. mrs. alving leaves the door open, and sits down with
her knitting on the sofa by the window.]

oswald. wasn't that pastor manders that went out just now?

mrs. alving. yes; he went down to the orphanage.

oswald. h'm. [the glass and decanter clink again.]

mrs. alving. [with a troubled glance.] dear oswald, you should take care
of that liqueur. it is strong.

oswald. it keeps out the damp.

mrs. alving. wouldn't you rather come in here, to me?

oswald. i mayn't smoke in there.

mrs. alving. you know quite well you may smoke cigars.

oswald. oh, all right then; i'll come in. just a tiny drop more first.
there! [he comes into the room with his cigar, and shuts the door after
him. a short silence.] where has the pastor gone to?

mrs. alving. i have just told you; he went down to the orphanage.

oswald. oh, yes; so you did.

mrs. alving. you shouldn't sit so long at table, oswald.

oswald. [holding his cigar behind him.] but i find it so pleasant,
mother. [strokes and caresses her.] just think what it is for me to come
home and sit at mother's own table, in mother's room, and eat mother's
delicious dishes.

mrs. alving. my dear, dear boy!

oswald. [somewhat impatiently, walks about and smokes.] and what else
can i do with myself here? i can't set to work at anything.

mrs. alving. why can't you?

oswald. in such weather as this? without a single ray of sunshine the
whole day? [walks up the room.] oh, not to be able to work--!

mrs. alving. perhaps it was not quite wise of you to come home?

oswald. oh, yes, mother; i had to.

mrs. alving. you know i would ten times rather forgo the joy of having
you here, than let you--

oswald. [stops beside the table.] now just tell me, mother: does it
really make you so very happy to have me home again?

mrs. alving. does it make me happy!

oswald. [crumpling up a newspaper.] i should have thought it must be
pretty much the same to you whether i was in existence or not.

mrs. alving. have you the heart to say that to your mother, oswald?

oswald. but you've got on very well without me all this time.

mrs. alving. yes; i have got on without you. that is true.

[a silence. twilight slowly begins to fall. oswald paces to and fro
across the room. he has laid his cigar down.]

oswald. [stops beside mrs. alving.] mother, may i sit on the sofa beside
you?

mrs. alving. [makes room for him.] yes, do, my dear boy.

oswald. [sits down.] there is something i must tell you, mother.

mrs. alving. [anxiously.] well?

oswald. [looks fixedly before him.] for i can't go on hiding it any
longer.

mrs. alving. hiding what? what is it?

oswald. [as before.] i could never bring myself to write to you about
it; and since i've come home--

mrs. alving. [seizes him by the arm.] oswald, what is the matter?

oswald. both yesterday and to-day i have tried to put the thoughts away
from me--to cast them off; but it's no use.

mrs. alving. [rising.] now you must tell me everything, oswald!

oswald. [draws her down to the sofa again.] sit still; and then i will
try to tell you.--i complained of fatigue after my journey--

mrs. alving. well? what then?

oswald. but it isn't that that is the matter with me; not any ordinary
fatigue--

mrs. alving. [tries to jump up.] you are not ill, oswald?

oswald. [draws her down again.] sit still, mother. do take it quietly.
i'm not downright ill, either; not what is commonly called "ill."
[clasps his hands above his head.] mother, my mind is broken
down--ruined--i shall never be able to work again! [with his hands
before his face, he buries his head in her lap, and breaks into bitter
sobbing.]

mrs. alving. [white and trembling.] oswald! look at me! no, no; it's not
true.

oswald. [looks up with despair in his eyes.] never to be able to work
again! never!--never! a living death! mother, can you imagine anything
so horrible?

mrs. alving. my poor boy! how has this horrible thing come upon you?

oswald. [sitting upright again.] that's just what i cannot possibly
grasp or understand. i have never led a dissipated life--never, in any
respect. you mustn't believe that of me, mother! i've never done that.

mrs. alving. i am sure you haven't, oswald.

oswald. and yet this has come upon me just the same--this awful
misfortune!

mrs. alving. oh, but it will pass over, my dear, blessed boy. it's
nothing but over-work. trust me, i am right.

oswald. [sadly.] i thought so too, at first; but it isn't so.

mrs. alving. tell me everything, from beginning to end.

oswald. yes, i will.

mrs. alving. when did you first notice it?

oswald. it was directly after i had been home last time, and had got
back to paris again. i began to feel the most violent pains in my
head--chiefly in the back of my head, they seemed to come. it was as
though a tight iron ring was being screwed round my neck and upwards.

mrs. alving. well, and then?

oswald. at first i thought it was nothing but the ordinary headache i
had been so plagued with while i was growing up--

mrs. alving. yes, yes--

oswald. but it wasn't that. i soon found that out. i couldn't work any
more. i wanted to begin upon a big new picture, but my powers seemed to
fail me; all my strength was crippled; i could form no definite images;
everything swam before me--whirling round and round. oh, it was an awful
state! at last i sent for a doctor--and from him i learned the truth.

mrs. alving. how do you mean?

oswald. he was one of the first doctors in paris. i told him my
symptoms; and then he set to work asking me a string of questions which
i thought had nothing to do with the matter. i couldn't imagine what the
man was after--

mrs. alving. well?

oswald. at last he said: "there has been something worm-eaten in you
from your birth." he used that very word--_vermoulu_.

mrs. alving. [breathlessly.] what did he mean by that?

oswald. i didn't understand either, and begged him to explain himself
more clearly. and then the old cynic said--[clenching his fist] oh--!

mrs. alving. what did he say?

oswald. he said, "the sins of the fathers are visited upon the
children."

mrs. alving. [rising slowly.] the sins of the fathers--!

oswald. i very nearly struck him in the face--

mrs. alving. [walks away across the room.] the sins of the fathers--

oswald. [smiles sadly.] yes; what do you think of that? of course i
assured him that such a thing was out of the question. but do you think
he gave in? no, he stuck to it; and it was only when i produced your
letters and translated the passages relating to father--

mrs. alving. but then--?

oswald. then of course he had to admit that he was on the wrong track;
and so i learned the truth--the incomprehensible truth! i ought not to
have taken part with my comrades in that lighthearted, glorious life of
theirs. it had been too much for my strength. so i had brought it upon
myself!

mrs. alving. oswald! no, no; do not believe it!

oswald. no other explanation was possible, he said. that's the awful
part of it. incurably ruined for life--by my own heedlessness! all that
i meant to have done in the world--i never dare think of it again--i'm
not able to think of it. oh! if i could only live over again, and undo
all i have done! [he buries his face in the sofa.]

mrs. alving. [wrings her hands and walks, in silent struggle, backwards
and forwards.]

oswald. [after a while, looks up and remains resting upon his elbow.] if
it had only been something inherited--something one wasn't responsible
for! but this! to have thrown away so shamefully, thoughtlessly,
recklessly, one's own happiness, one's own health, everything in the
world--one's future, one's very life--!

mrs. alving. no, no, my dear, darling boy; this is impossible! [bends
over him.] things are not so desperate as you think.

oswald. oh, you don't know--[springs up.] and then, mother, to cause
you all this sorrow! many a time i have almost wished and hoped that at
bottom you didn't care so very much about me.

mrs. alving. i, oswald? my only boy! you are all i have in the world!
the only thing i care about!

oswald. [seizes both her hands and kisses them.] yes, yes, i see it.
when i'm at home, i see it, of course; and that's almost the hardest
part for me.--but now you know the whole story and now we won't talk any
more about it to-day. i daren't think of it for long together. [goes up
the room.] get me something to drink, mother.

mrs. alving. to drink? what do you want to drink now?

oswald. oh, anything you like. you have some cold punch in the house.

mrs. alving. yes, but my dear oswald--

oswald. don't refuse me, mother. do be kind, now! i must have something
to wash down all these gnawing thoughts. [goes into the conservatory.]
and then--it's so dark here! [mrs. alving pulls a bell-rope on the
right.] and this ceaseless rain! it may go on week after week, for
months together. never to get a glimpse of the sun! i can't recollect
ever having seen the sun shine all the times i've been at home.

mrs. alving. oswald--you are thinking of going away from me.

oswald. h'm--[drawing a heavy breath.]--i'm not thinking of anything. i
cannot think of anything! [in a low voice.] i let thinking alone.

regina. [from the dining-room.] did you ring, ma'am?

mrs. alving. yes; let us have the lamp in.

regina. yes, ma'am. it's ready lighted. [goes out.]

mrs. alving. [goes across to oswald.] oswald, be frank with me.

oswald. well, so i am, mother. [goes to the table.] i think i have told
you enough.

[regina brings the lamp and sets it upon the table.]

mrs. alving. regina, you may bring us a small bottle of champagne.

regina. very well, ma'am. [goes out.]

oswald. [puts his arm round mrs. alving's neck.] that's just what i
wanted. i knew mother wouldn't let her boy go thirsty.

mrs. alving. my own, poor, darling oswald; how could i deny you anything
now?

oswald. [eagerly.] is that true, mother? do you mean it?

mrs. alving. how? what?

oswald. that you couldn't deny me anything.

mrs. alving. my dear oswald--

oswald. hush!

regina. [brings a tray with a half-bottle of champagne and two glasses,
which she sets on the table.] shall i open it?

oswald. no, thanks. i will do it myself.

[regina goes out again.]

mrs. alving. [sits down by the table.] what was it you meant--that i
mustn't deny you?

oswald. [busy opening the bottle.] first let us have a glass--or two.

[the cork pops; he pours wine into one glass, and is about to pour it
into the other.]

mrs. alving. [holding her hand over it.] thanks; not for me.

oswald. oh! won't you? then i will!

[he empties the glass, fills, and empties it again; then he sits down by
the table.]

mrs. alving. [in expectancy.] well?

oswald. [without looking at her.] tell me--i thought you and pastor
manders seemed so odd--so quiet--at dinner to-day.

mrs. alving. did you notice it?

oswald. yes. h'm--[after a short silence.] tell me: what do you think of
regina?

mrs. alving. what do i think?

oswald. yes; isn't she splendid?

mrs. alving. my dear oswald, you don't know her as i do--

oswald. well?

mrs. alving. regina, unfortunately, was allowed to stay at home too
long. i ought to have taken her earlier into my house.

oswald. yes, but isn't she splendid to look at, mother? [he fills his
glass.]

mrs. alving. regina has many serious faults--

oswald. oh, what does that matter? [he drinks again.]

mrs. alving. but i am fond of her, nevertheless, and i am responsible
for her. i wouldn't for all the world have any harm happen to her.

oswald. [springs up.] mother, regina is my only salvation!

mrs. alving. [rising.] what do you mean by that?

oswald. i cannot go on bearing all this anguish of soul alone.

mrs. alving. have you not your mother to share it with you?

oswald. yes; that's what i thought; and so i came home to you. but that
will not do. i see it won't do. i cannot endure my life here.

mrs. alving. oswald!

oswald. i must live differently, mother. that is why i must leave you. i
will not have you looking on at it.

mrs. alving. my unhappy boy! but, oswald, while you are so ill as this--

oswald. if it were only the illness, i should stay with you, mother, you
may be sure; for you are the best friend i have in the world.

mrs. alving. yes, indeed i am, oswald; am i not?

oswald. [wanders restlessly about.] but it's all the torment, the
gnawing remorse--and then, the great, killing dread. oh--that awful
dread!

mrs. alving. [walking after him.] dread? what dread? what do you mean?

oswald. oh, you mustn't ask me any more. i don't know. i can't describe
it.

mrs. alving. [goes over to the right and pulls the bell.]

oswald. what is it you want?

mrs. alving. i want my boy to be happy--that is what i want. he sha'n't
go on brooding over things. [to regina, who appears at the door:] more
champagne--a large bottle. [regina goes.]

oswald. mother!

mrs. alving. do you think we don't know how to live here at home?

oswald. isn't she splendid to look at? how beautifully she's built! and
so thoroughly healthy!

mrs. alving. [sits by the table.] sit down, oswald; let us talk quietly
together.

oswald. [sits.] i daresay you don't know, mother, that i owe regina some
reparation.

mrs. alving. you!

oswald. for a bit of thoughtlessness, or whatever you like to call
it--very innocent, at any rate. when i was home last time--

mrs. alving. well?

oswald. she used often to ask me about paris, and i used to tell her one
thing and another. then i recollect i happened to say to her one day,
"shouldn't you like to go there yourself?"

mrs. alving. well?

oswald. i saw her face flush, and then she said, "yes, i should like it
of all things." "ah, well," i replied, "it might perhaps be managed"--or
something like that.

mrs. alving. and then?

oswald. of course i had forgotten all about it; but the day before
yesterday i happened to ask her whether she was glad i was to stay at
home so long--

mrs. alving. yes?

oswald. and then she gave me such a strange look, and asked, "but what's
to become of my trip to paris?"

mrs. alving. her trip!

oswald. and so it came out that she had taken the thing seriously; that
she had been thinking of me the whole time, and had set to work to learn
french--

mrs. alving. so that was why--!

oswald. mother--when i saw that fresh, lovely, splendid girl standing
there before me--till then i had hardly noticed her--but when she stood
there as though with open arms ready to receive me--

mrs. alving. oswald!

oswald.--then it flashed upon me that in her lay my salvation; for i saw
that she was full of the joy of life.

mrs. alving. [starts.] the joy of life? can there be salvation in that?

regina. [from the dining room, with a bottle of champagne.] i'm sorry to
have been so long, but i had to go to the cellar. [places the bottle on
the table.]

oswald. and now bring another glass.

regina. [looks at him in surprise.] there is mrs. alving's glass, mr.
alving.

oswald. yes, but bring one for yourself, regina. [regina starts and
gives a lightning-like side glance at mrs. alving.] why do you wait?

regina. [softly and hesitatingly.] is it mrs. alving's wish?

mrs. alving. bring the glass, regina.

[regina goes out into the dining-room.]

oswald. [follows her with his eyes.] have you noticed how she walks?--so
firmly and lightly!

mrs. alving. this can never be, oswald!

oswald. it's a settled thing. can't you see that? it's no use saying
anything against it.

[regina enters with an empty glass, which she keeps in her hand.]

oswald. sit down, regina.

[regina looks inquiringly at mrs. alving.]

mrs. alving. sit down. [regina sits on a chair by the dining room door,
still holding the empty glass in her hand.] oswald--what were you saying
about the joy of life?

oswald. ah, the joy of life, mother--that's a thing you don't know much
about in these parts. i have never felt it here.

mrs. alving. not when you are with me?

oswald. not when i'm at home. but you don't understand that.

mrs. alving. yes, yes; i think i almost understand it--now.

oswald. and then, too, the joy of work! at bottom, it's the same thing.
but that, too, you know nothing about.

mrs. alving. perhaps you are right. tell me more about it, oswald.

oswald. i only mean that here people are brought up to believe that
work is a curse and a punishment for sin, and that life is something
miserable, something it would be best to have done with, the sooner the
better.

mrs. alving. "a vale of tears," yes; and we certainly do our best to
make it one.

oswald. but in the great world people won't hear of such things. there,
nobody really believes such doctrines any longer. there, you feel it a
positive bliss and ecstasy merely to draw the breath of life. mother,
have you noticed that everything i have painted has turned upon the joy
of life?--always, always upon the joy of life?--light and sunshine and
glorious air and faces radiant with happiness. that is why i'm afraid of
remaining at home with you.

mrs. alving. afraid? what are you afraid of here, with me?

oswald. i'm afraid lest all my instincts should be warped into ugliness.

mrs. alving. [looks steadily at him.] do you think that is what would
happen?

oswald. i know it. you may live the same life here as there, and yet it
won't be the same life.

mrs. alving. [who has been listening eagerly, rises, her eyes big with
thought, and says:] now i see the sequence of things.

oswald. what is it you see?

mrs. alving. i see it now for the first time. and now i can speak.

oswald. [rising.] mother, i don't understand you.

regina. [who has also risen.] perhaps i ought to go?

mrs. alving. no. stay here. now i can speak. now, my boy, you shall know
the whole truth. and then you can choose. oswald! regina!

oswald. hush! the pastor--

manders. [enters by the hall door.] there! we have had a most edifying
time down there.

oswald. so have we.

manders. we must stand by engstrand and his sailors' home. regina must
go to him and help him--

regina. no thank you, sir.

manders. [noticing her for the first time.] what--? you here? and with a
glass in your hand!

regina. [hastily putting the glass down.] pardon!

oswald. regina is going with me, mr. manders.

manders. going! with you!

oswald. yes; as my wife--if she wishes it.

manders. but, merciful god--!

regina. i can't help it, sir.

oswald. or she'll stay here, if i stay.

regina. [involuntarily.] here!

manders. i am thunderstruck at your conduct, mrs. alving.

mrs. alving. they will do neither one thing nor the other; for now i can
speak out plainly.

manders. you surely will not do that! no, no, no!

mrs. alving. yes, i can speak and i will. and no ideals shall suffer
after all.

oswald. mother--what is it you are hiding from me?

regina. [listening.] oh, ma'am, listen! don't you hear shouts outside.
[she goes into the conservatory and looks out.]

oswald. [at the window on the left.] what's going on? where does that
light come from?

regina. [cries out.] the orphanage is on fire!

mrs. alving. [rushing to the window.] on fire!

manders. on fire! impossible! i've just come from there.

oswald. where's my hat? oh, never mind it--father's orphanage--! [he
rushes out through the garden door.]

mrs. alving. my shawl, regina! the whole place is in a blaze!

manders. terrible! mrs. alving, it is a judgment upon this abode of
lawlessness.

mrs. alving. yes, of course. come, regina. [she and regina hasten out
through the hall.]

manders. [clasps his hands together.] and we left it uninsured! [he goes
out the same way.]




act third.

[the room as before. all the doors stand open. the lamp is still burning
on the table. it is dark out of doors; there is only a faint glow from
the conflagration in the background to the left.]

[mrs. alving, with a shawl over her head, stands in the conservatory,
looking out. regina, also with a shawl on, stands a little behind her.]

mrs. alving. the whole thing burnt!--burnt to the ground!

regina. the basement is still burning.

mrs. alving. how is it oswald doesn't come home? there's nothing to be
saved.

regina. should you like me to take down his hat to him?

mrs. alving. has he not even got his hat on?

regina. [pointing to the hall.] no; there it hangs.

mrs. alving. let it be. he must come up now. i shall go and look for him
myself. [she goes out through the garden door.]

manders. [comes in from the hall.] is not mrs. alving here?

regina. she has just gone down the garden.

manders. this is the most terrible night i ever went through.

regina. yes; isn't it a dreadful misfortune, sir?

manders. oh, don't talk about it! i can hardly bear to think of it.

regina. how can it have happened--?

manders. don't ask me, miss engstrand! how should _i_ know? do you,
too--? is it not enough that your father--?

regina. what about him?

manders. oh, he has driven me distracted--

engstrand. [enters through the hall.] your reverence--

manders. [turns round in terror.] are you after me here, too?

engstrand. yes, strike me dead, but i must--! oh, lord! what am i
saying? but this is a terrible ugly business, your reverence.

manders. [walks to and fro.] alas! alas!

regina. what's the matter?

engstrand. why, it all came of this here prayer-meeting, you see.
[softly.] the bird's limed, my girl. [aloud.] and to think it should be
my doing that such a thing should be his reverence's doing!

manders. but i assure you, engstrand--

engstrand. there wasn't another soul except your reverence as ever laid
a finger on the candles down there.

manders. [stops.] so you declare. but i certainly cannot recollect that
i ever had a candle in my hand.

engstrand. and i saw as clear as daylight how your reverence took the
candle and snuffed it with your fingers, and threw away the snuff among
the shavings.

manders. and you stood and looked on?

engstrand. yes; i saw it as plain as a pike-staff, i did.

manders. it's quite beyond my comprehension. besides, it has never been
my habit to snuff candles with my fingers.

engstrand. and terrible risky it looked, too, that it did! but is there
such a deal of harm done after all, your reverence?

manders. [walks restlessly to and fro.] oh, don't ask me!

engstrand. [walks with him.] and your reverence hadn't insured it,
neither?

manders. [continuing to walk up and down.] no, no, no; i have told you
so.

engstrand. [following him.] not insured! and then to go straight away
down and set light to the whole thing! lord, lord, what a misfortune!

manders. [wipes the sweat from his forehead.] ay, you may well say that,
engstrand.

engstrand. and to think that such a thing should happen to a benevolent
institution, that was to have been a blessing both to town and country,
as the saying goes! the newspapers won't be for handling your reverence
very gently, i expect.

manders. no; that is just what i am thinking of. that is almost the
worst of the whole matter. all the malignant attacks and imputations--!
oh, it makes me shudder to think of it!

mrs. alving. [comes in from the garden.] he is not to be persuaded to
leave the fire.

manders. ah, there you are, mrs. alving.

mrs. alving. so you have escaped your inaugural address, pastor manders.

manders. oh, i should so gladly--

mrs. alving. [in an undertone.] it is all for the best. that orphanage
would have done no one any good.

manders. do you think not?

mrs. alving. do you think it would?

manders. it is a terrible misfortune, all the same.

mrs. alving. let us speak of it plainly, as a matter of business.--are
you waiting for mr. manders, engstrand?

engstrand. [at the hall door.] that's just what i'm a-doing of, ma'am.

mrs. alving. then sit down meanwhile.

engstrand. thank you, ma'am; i'd as soon stand.

mrs. alving. [to manders.] i suppose you are going by the steamer?

manders. yes; it starts in an hour.

mrs. alving. then be so good as to take all the papers with you. i won't
hear another word about this affair. i have other things to think of--

manders. mrs. alving--

mrs. alving. later on i shall send you a power of attorney to settle
everything as you please.

manders. that i will very readily undertake. the original destination of
the endowment must now be completely changed, alas!

mrs. alving. of course it must.

manders. i think, first of all, i shall arrange that the solvik property
shall pass to the parish. the land is by no means without value. it can
always be turned to account for some purpose or other. and the interest
of the money in the bank i could, perhaps, best apply for the benefit of
some undertaking of acknowledged value to the town.

mrs. alving. do just as you please. the whole matter is now completely
indifferent to me.

engstrand. give a thought to my sailors' home, your reverence.

manders. upon my word, that is not a bad suggestion. that must be
considered.

engstrand. oh, devil take considering--lord forgive me!

manders. [with a sigh.] and unfortunately i cannot tell how long i shall
be able to retain control of these things--whether public opinion may
not compel me to retire. it entirely depends upon the result of the
official inquiry into the fire--

mrs. alving. what are you talking about?

manders. and the result can by no means be foretold.

engstrand. [comes close to him.] ay, but it can though. for here stands
old jacob engstrand.

manders. well well, but--?

engstrand. [more softy.] and jacob engstrand isn't the man to desert a
noble benefactor in the hour of need, as the saying goes.

manders. yes, but my good fellow--how--?

engstrand. jacob engstrand may be likened to a sort of a guardian angel,
he may, your reverence.

manders. no, no; i really cannot accept that.

engstrand. oh, that'll be the way of it, all the same. i know a man as
has taken others' sins upon himself before now, i do.

manders. jacob! [wrings his hand.] yours is a rare nature. well,
you shall be helped with your sailors' home. that you may rely upon.
[engstrand tries to thank him, but cannot for emotion.]

manders. [hangs his travelling-bag over his shoulder.] and now let us
set out. we two will go together.

engstrand. [at the dining-room door, softly to regina.] you come along
too, my lass. you shall live as snug as the yolk in an egg.

regina. [tosses her head.] _merci_! [she goes out into the hall and
fetches manders' overcoat.]

manders. good-bye, mrs. alving! and may the spirit of law and order
descend upon this house, and that quickly.

mrs. alving. good-bye, pastor manders. [she goes up towards the
conservatory, as she sees oswald coming in through the garden door.]

engstrand. [while he and regina help manders to get his coat on.]
good-bye, my child. and if any trouble should come to you, you know
where jacob engstrand is to be found. [softly.] little harbour street,
h'm--! [to mrs. alving and oswald.] and the refuge for wandering
mariners shall be called "chamberlain alving's home," that it shall! and
if so be as i'm spared to carry on that house in my own way, i make so
bold as to promise that it shall be worthy of the chamberlain's memory.

manders. [in the doorway.] h'm--h'm!--come along, my dear engstrand.
good-bye! good-bye! [he and engstrand go out through the hall.]

oswald. [goes towards the table.] what house was he talking about?

mrs. alving. oh, a kind of home that he and pastor manders want to set
up.

oswald. it will burn down like the other.

mrs. alving. what makes you think so?

oswald. everything will burn. all that recalls father's memory is
doomed. here am i, too, burning down. [regina starts and looks at him.]

mrs. alving. oswald! you oughtn't to have remained so long down there,
my poor boy.

oswald. [sits down by the table.] i almost think you are right.

mrs. alving. let me dry your face, oswald; you are quite wet. [she dries
his face with her pocket-handkerchief.]

oswald. [stares indifferently in front of him.] thanks, mother.

mrs. alving. are you not tired, oswald? should you like to sleep?

oswald. [nervously.] no, no--not to sleep! i never sleep. i only pretend
to. [sadly.] that will come soon enough.

mrs. alving. [looking sorrowfully at him.] yes, you really are ill, my
blessed boy.

regina. [eagerly.] is mr. alving ill?

oswald. [impatiently.] oh, do shut all the doors! this killing dread--

mrs. alving. close the doors, regina.

[regina shuts them and remains standing by the hall door. mrs. alving
takes her shawl off: regina does the same. mrs. alving draws a chair
across to oswald's, and sits by him.]

mrs. alving. there now! i am going to sit beside you--

oswald. yes, do. and regina shall stay here too. regina shall be with me
always. you will come to the rescue, regina, won't you?

regina. i don't understand--

mrs. alving. to the rescue?

oswald. yes--when the need comes.

mrs. alving. oswald, have you not your mother to come to the rescue?

oswald. you? [smiles.] no, mother; that rescue you will never bring me.
[laughs sadly.] you! ha ha! [looks earnestly at her.] though, after all,
who ought to do it if not you? [impetuously.] why can't you say "thou"
to me, regina? [note: "sige du" = fr. _tutoyer_] why don't you call me
"oswald"?

regina. [softly.] i don't think mrs. alving would like it.

mrs. alving. you shall have leave to, presently. and meanwhile sit over
here beside us.

[regina seats herself demurely and hesitatingly at the other side of the
table.]

mrs. alving. and now, my poor suffering boy, i am going to take the
burden off your mind--

oswald. you, mother?

mrs. alving.--all the gnawing remorse and self-reproach you speak of.

oswald. and you think you can do that?

mrs. alving. yes, now i can, oswald. a little while ago you spoke of the
joy of life; and at that word a new light burst for me over my life and
everything connected with it.

oswald. [shakes his head.] i don't understand you.

mrs. alving. you ought to have known your father when he was a young
lieutenant. he was brimming over with the joy of life!

oswald. yes, i know he was.

mrs. alving. it was like a breezy day only to look at him. and what
exuberant strength and vitality there was in him!

oswald. well--?

mrs. alving. well then, child of joy as he was--for he was like a child
in those days--he had to live at home here in a half-grown town,
which had no joys to offer him--only dissipations. he had no object
in life--only an official position. he had no work into which he could
throw himself heart and soul; he had only business. he had not a single
comrade that could realise what the joy of life meant--only loungers and
boon-companions--

oswald. mother--!

mrs. alving. so the inevitable happened.

oswald. the inevitable?

mrs. alving. you told me yourself, this evening, what would become of
you if you stayed at home.

oswald. do you mean to say that father--?

mrs. alving. your poor father found no outlet for the overpowering joy
of life that was in him. and i brought no brightness into his home.

oswald. not even you?

mrs. alving. they had taught me a great deal about duties and so forth,
which i went on obstinately believing in. everything was marked out into
duties--into my duties, and his duties, and--i am afraid i made his home
intolerable for your poor father, oswald.

oswald. why have you never spoken of this in writing to me?

mrs. alving. i have never before seen it in such a light that i could
speak of it to you, his son.

oswald. in what light did you see it, then?

mrs. alving. [slowly.] i saw only this one thing: that your father was a
broken-down man before you were born.

oswald. [softly.] ah--! [he rises and walks away to the window.]

mrs. alving. and then; day after day, i dwelt on the one thought that by
rights regina should be at home in this house--just like my own boy.

oswald. [turning round quickly.] regina--!

regina. [springs up and asks, with bated breath.] i--?

mrs. alving. yes, now you know it, both of you.

oswald. regina!

regina. [to herself.] so mother was that kind of woman.

mrs. alving. your mother had many good qualities, regina.

regina. yes, but she was one of that sort, all the same. oh, i've often
suspected it; but--and now, if you please, ma'am, may i be allowed to go
away at once?

mrs. alving. do you really wish it, regina?

regina. yes, indeed i do.

mrs. alving. of course you can do as you like; but--

oswald. [goes towards regina.] go away now? your place is here.

regina. _merci_, mr. alving!--or now, i suppose, i may say oswald. but i
can tell you this wasn't at all what i expected.

mrs. alving. regina, i have not been frank with you--

regina. no, that you haven't indeed. if i'd known that oswald was an
invalid, why--and now, too, that it can never come to anything serious
between us--i really can't stop out here in the country and wear myself
out nursing sick people.

oswald. not even one who is so near to you?

regina. no, that i can't. a poor girl must make the best of her young
days, or she'll be left out in the cold before she knows where she is.
and i, too, have the joy of life in me, mrs. alving!

mrs. alving. unfortunately, you leave. but don't throw yourself away,
regina.

regina. oh, what must be, must be. if oswald takes after his father, i
take after my mother, i daresay.--may i ask, ma'am, if pastor manders
knows all this about me?

mrs. alving. pastor manders knows all about it.

regina. [busied in putting on her shawl.] well then, i'd better make
haste and get away by this steamer. the pastor is such a nice man to
deal with; and i certainly think i've as much right to a little of that
money as he has--that brute of a carpenter.

mrs. alving. you are heartily welcome to it, regina.

regina. [looks hard at her.] i think you might have brought me up as a
gentleman's daughter, ma'am; it would have suited me better. [tosses her
head.] but pooh--what does it matter! [with a bitter side glance at the
corked bottle.] i may come to drink champagne with gentlefolks yet.

mrs. alving. and if you ever need a home, regina, come to me.

regina. no, thank you, ma'am. pastor manders will look after me, i know.
and if the worst comes to the worst, i know of one house where i've
every right to a place.

mrs. alving. where is that?

regina. "chamberlain alving's home."

mrs. alving. regina--now i see it--you are going to your ruin.

regina. oh, stuff! good-bye. [she nods and goes out through the hall.]

oswald. [stands at the window and looks out.] is she gone?

mrs. alving. yes.

oswald. [murmuring aside to himself.] i think it was a mistake, this.

mrs. alving. [goes up behind him and lays her hands on his shoulders.]
oswald, my dear boy--has it shaken you very much?

oswald. [turns his face towards her.] all that about father, do you
mean?

mrs. alving. yes, about your unhappy father. i am so afraid it may have
been too much for you.

oswald. why should you fancy that? of course it came upon me as a great
surprise; but it can make no real difference to me.

mrs. alving. [draws her hands away.] no difference! that your father was
so infinitely unhappy!

oswald. of course i can pity him, as i would anybody else; but--

mrs. alving. nothing more! your own father!

oswald. [impatiently.]oh, "father,"--"father"! i never knew anything of
father. i remember nothing about him, except that he once made me sick.

mrs. alving. this is terrible to think of! ought not a son to love his
father, whatever happens?

oswald. when a son has nothing to thank his father for? has never known
him? do you really cling to that old superstition?--you who are so
enlightened in other ways?

mrs. alving. can it be only a superstition--?

oswald. yes; surely you can see that, mother. it's one of those notions
that are current in the world, and so--

mrs. alving. [deeply moved.] ghosts!

oswald. [crossing the room.] yes; you may call them ghosts.

mrs. alving. [wildly.] oswald--then you don't love me, either!

oswald. you i know, at any rate--

mrs. alving. yes, you know me; but is that all!

oswald. and, of course, i know how fond you are of me, and i can't but
be grateful to you. and then you can be so useful to me, now that i am
ill.

mrs. alving. yes, cannot i, oswald? oh, i could almost bless the illness
that has driven you home to me. for i see very plainly that you are not
mine: i have to win you.

oswald. [impatiently.] yes yes yes; all these are just so many phrases.
you must remember that i am a sick man, mother. i can't be much taken up
with other people; i have enough to do thinking about myself.

mrs. alving. [in a low voice.] i shall be patient and easily satisfied.

oswald. and cheerful too, mother!

mrs. alving. yes, my dear boy, you are quite right. [goes towards him.]
have i relieved you of all remorse and self-reproach now?

oswald. yes, you have. but now who will relieve me of the dread?

mrs. alving. the dread?

oswald. [walks across the room.] regina could have been got to do it.

mrs. alving. i don't understand you. what is this about dread--and
regina?

oswald. is it very late, mother?

mrs. alving. it is early morning. [she looks out through the
conservatory.] the day is dawning over the mountains. and the weather is
clearing, oswald. in a little while you shall see the sun.

oswald. i'm glad of that. oh, i may still have much to rejoice in and
live for--

mrs. alving. i should think so, indeed!

oswald. even if i can't work--

mrs. alving. oh, you'll soon be able to work again, my dear boy--now
that you haven't got all those gnawing and depressing thoughts to brood
over any longer.

oswald. yes, i'm glad you were able to rid me of all those fancies. and
when i've got over this one thing more--[sits on the sofa.] now we will
have a little talk, mother--

mrs. alving. yes, let us. [she pushes an arm-chair towards the sofa, and
sits down close to him.]

oswald. and meantime the sun will be rising. and then you will know all.
and then i shall not feel this dread any longer.

mrs. alving. what is it that i am to know?

oswald. [not listening to her.] mother, did you not say a little while
ago, that there was nothing in the world you would not do for me, if i
asked you?

mrs. alving. yes, indeed i said so!

oswald. and you'll stick to it, mother?

mrs. alving. you may rely on that, my dear and only boy! i have nothing
in the world to live for but you alone.

oswald. very well, then; now you shall hear--mother, you have a strong,
steadfast mind, i know. now you're to sit quite still when you hear it.

mrs. alving. what dreadful thing can it be--?

oswald. you're not to scream out. do you hear? do you promise me that?
we will sit and talk about it quietly. do you promise me, mother?

mrs. alving. yes, yes; i promise. only speak!

oswald. well, you must know that all this fatigue--and my inability to
think of work--all that is not the illness itself--

mrs. alving. then what is the illness itself?

oswald. the disease i have as my birthright--[he points to his forehead
and adds very softly]--is seated here.

mrs. alving. [almost voiceless.] oswald! no--no!

oswald. don't scream. i can't bear it. yes, mother, it is seated here
waiting. and it may break out any day--at any moment.

mrs. alving. oh, what horror--!

oswald. now, quiet, quiet. that is how it stands with me--

mrs. alving. [springs up.] it's not true, oswald! it's impossible! it
cannot be so!

oswald. i have had one attack down there already. it was soon over. but
when i came to know the state i had been in, then the dread descended
upon me, raging and ravening; and so i set off home to you as fast as i
could.

mrs. alving. then this is the dread--!

oswald. yes--it's so indescribably loathsome, you know. oh, if it
had only been an ordinary mortal disease--! for i'm not so afraid of
death--though i should like to live as long as i can.

mrs. alving. yes, yes, oswald, you must!

oswald. but this is so unutterably loathsome. to become a little baby
again! to have to be fed! to have to--oh, it's not to be spoken of!

mrs. alving. the child has his mother to nurse him.

oswald. [springs up.] no, never that! that is just what i will not have.
i can't endure to think that perhaps i should lie in that state for many
years--and get old and grey. and in the meantime you might die and
leave me. [sits in mrs. alving's chair.] for the doctor said it wouldn't
necessarily prove fatal at once. he called it a sort of softening of the
brain--or something like that. [smiles sadly.] i think that expression
sounds so nice. it always sets me thinking of cherry-coloured
velvet--something soft and delicate to stroke.

mrs. alving. [shrieks.] oswald!

oswald. [springs up and paces the room.] and now you have taken regina
from me. if i could only have had her! she would have come to the
rescue, i know.

mrs. alving. [goes to him.] what do you mean by that, my darling boy? is
there any help in the world that i would not give you?

oswald. when i got over my attack in paris, the doctor told me that when
it comes again--and it will come--there will be no more hope.

mrs. alving. he was heartless enough to--

oswald. i demanded it of him. i told him i had preparations to make--[he
smiles cunningly.] and so i had. [he takes a little box from his inner
breast pocket and opens it.] mother, do you see this?

mrs. alving. what is it?

oswald. morphia.

mrs. alving. [looks at him horror-struck.] oswald--my boy!

oswald. i've scraped together twelve pilules--

mrs. alving. [snatches at it.] give me the box, oswald.

oswald. not yet, mother. [he hides the box again in his pocket.]

mrs. alving. i shall never survive this!

oswald. it must be survived. now if i'd had regina here, i should have
told her how things stood with me--and begged her to come to the rescue
at the last. she would have done it. i know she would.

mrs. alving. never!

oswald. when the horror had come upon me, and she saw me lying there
helpless, like a little new-born baby, impotent, lost, hopeless--past
all saving--

mrs. alving. never in all the world would regina have done this!

oswald. regina would have done it. regina was so splendidly
light-hearted. and she would soon have wearied of nursing an invalid
like me.

mrs. alving. then heaven be praised that regina is not here.

oswald. well then, it is you that must come to the rescue, mother.

mrs. alving. [shrieks aloud.] i!

oswald. who should do it if not you?

mrs. alving. i! your mother!

oswald. for that very reason.

mrs. alving. i, who gave you life!

oswald. i never asked you for life. and what sort of a life have you
given me? i will not have it! you shall take it back again!

mrs. alving. help! help! [she runs out into the hall.]

oswald. [going after her.] do not leave me! where are you going?

mrs. alving. [in the hall.] to fetch the doctor, oswald! let me pass!

oswald. [also outside.] you shall not go out. and no one shall come in.
[the locking of a door is heard.]

mrs. alving. [comes in again.] oswald! oswald--my child!

oswald. [follows her.] have you a mother's heart for me--and yet can see
me suffer from this unutterable dread?

mrs. alving. [after a moment's silence, commands herself, and says:]
here is my hand upon it.

oswald. will you--?

mrs. alving. if it should ever be necessary. but it will never be
necessary. no, no; it is impossible.

oswald. well, let us hope so. and let us live together as long as we
can. thank you, mother. [he seats himself in the arm-chair which mrs.
alving has moved to the sofa. day is breaking. the lamp is still burning
on the table.]

mrs. alving. [drawing near cautiously.] do you feel calm now?

oswald. yes.

mrs. alving. [bending over him.] it has been a dreadful fancy of yours,
oswald--nothing but a fancy. all this excitement has been too much for
you. but now you shall have a long rest; at home with your mother, my own
blessëd boy. everything you point to you shall have, just as when you
were a little child.--there now. the crisis is over. you see how easily
it passed! oh, i was sure it would.--and do you see, oswald, what a
lovely day we are going to have? brilliant sunshine! now you can really
see your home. [she goes to the table and puts out the lamp. sunrise.
the glacier and the snow-peaks in the background glow in the morning
light.]

oswald. [sits in the arm-chair with his back towards the landscape,
without moving. suddenly he says:] mother, give me the sun.

mrs. alving. [by the table, starts and looks at him.] what do you say?

oswald. [repeats, in a dull, toneless voice.] the sun. the sun.

mrs. alving. [goes to him.] oswald, what is the matter with you?

oswald. [seems to shrink together to the chair; all his muscles relax;
his face is expressionless, his eyes have a glassy stare.]

mrs. alving. [quivering with terror.] what is this? [shrieks.] oswald!
what is the matter with you? [falls on her knees beside him and shakes
him.] oswald! oswald! look at me! don't you know me?

oswald. [tonelessly as before.] the sun.--the sun.

mrs. alving. [springs up in despair, entwines her hands in her hair and
shrieks.] i cannot bear it! [whispers, as though petrified]; i cannot
bear it! never! [suddenly.] where has he got them? [fumbles hastily
in his breast.] here! [shrinks back a few steps and screams:] no! no;
no!--yes!--no; no!

[she stands a few steps away from him with her hands twisted in her
hair, and stares at him in speechless horror.]

oswald. [sits motionless as before and says.] the sun.--the sun.


the end


<|EndOfText|>

introduction.

little eyolf was written in christiania during 1894, and published
in copenhagen on december 11 in that year. by this time ibsen's
correspondence has become so scanty as to afford us no clue to what may
be called the biographical antecedents of the play. even of anecdotic
history very little attaches to it. for only one of the characters has a
definite model been suggested. ibsen himself told his french translator,
count prozor, that the original of the rat-wife was "a little old woman
who came to kill rats at the school where he was educated. she carried
a little dog in a bag, and it was said that children had been drowned
through following her." this means that ibsen did not himself adapt
to his uses the legend so familiar to us in browning's _pied piper of
hamelin_, but found it ready adapted by the popular imagination of his
native place, skien. "this idea," ibsen continued to count prozor, "was
just what i wanted for bringing about the disappearance of little eyolf,
in whom the infatuation [note: the french word used by count prozor is
"infatuation." i can think of no other rendering for it; but i do not
quite know what it means as applied to allmers and eyolf.] and the
feebleness of his father reproduced, but concentrated, exaggerated, as
one often sees them in the son of such a father." dr. elias tells us
that a well-known lady-artist, who in middle life suggested to him the
figure of lona hessel, was in later years the model for the rat-wife.
there is no inconsistency between these two accounts of the matter. the
idea was doubtless suggested by his recollection of the rat-catcher of
skien, while traits of manner and physiognomy might be borrowed from the
lady in question.

the verse quoted on pp. 52 and 53 [transcriber's note: "there stood the
champagne," etc., in act i] is the last line of a very well-known poem
by johan sebastian welhaven, entitled _republikanerne_, written in 1839.
an unknown guest in a paris restaurant has been challenged by a noisy
party of young frenchmen to join them in drinking a health to poland. he
refuses; they denounce him as a craven and a slave; he bares his breast
and shows the scars of wounds received in fighting for the country whose
lost cause has become a subject for conventional enthusiasm and windy
rhetoric.

   "de saae pas hverandre. han vandred sin vei.
    de havde champagne, men rörte den ei."

"they looked at each other. he went on his way. there stood their
champagne, but they did not touch it." the champagne incident leads me
to wonder whether the relation between rita and allmers may not have
been partly suggested to ibsen by the relation between charlotte
stieglitz and her weakling of a husband. their story must have been
known to him through george brandes's _young germany_, if not more
directly. "from time to time," says dr. brandes, "there came over her
what she calls her champagne-mood; she grieves that this is no longer
the case with him." [note: _main currents of nineteenth century
literature_, vol. vi. p. 299] did the germ of the incident lie in these
words?

the first performance of the play in norway took place at the
christiania theatre on january 15, 1895, fru wettergren playing rita and
fru dybwad, asta. in copenhagen (march 13, 1895) fru oda nielsen and fru
hennings played rita and asta respectively, while emil poulsen played
allmers. the first german rita (deutsches theater, berlin, january 12,
1895) was frau agnes sorma, with reicher as allmers. six weeks later
frl. sandrock played rita at the burgtheater, vienna. in may 1895 the
play was acted by m. lugné-poë's company in paris. the first performance
in english took place at the avenue theatre, london, on the afternoon
of november 23, 1896, with miss janet achurch as rita, miss elizabeth
robins as asta, and mrs. patrick campbell as the rat-wife. miss
achurch's rita made a profound impression. mrs. patrick campbell
afterwards played the part in a short series of evening performances.
in the spring of 1895 the play was acted in chicago by a company of
scandinavian amateurs, presumably in norwegian. fru oda nielsen has
recently (i understand) given some performances of it in new york, and
madame alla nazimova has announced it for production during the coming
season (1907-1908).

as the external history of _little eyolf_ is so short. i am tempted to
depart from my usual practice, and say a few words as to its matter and
meaning.

george brandes, writing of this play, has rightly observed that "a kind
of dualism has always been perceptible in ibsen; he pleads the cause of
nature, and he castigates nature with mystic morality; only sometimes
nature is allowed the first voice, sometimes morality. in _the master
builder_ and in _ghosts_ the lover of nature in ibsen was predominant;
here, as in _brand_ and _the wild duck_, the castigator is in the
ascendant." so clearly is this the case in _little eyolf_ that ibsen
seems almost to fall into line with mr. thomas hardy. to say nothing of
analogies of detail between _little eyolf_ and _jude the obscure_, there
is this radical analogy, that they are both utterances of a profound
pessimism, both indictments of nature.

but while mr. hardy's pessimism is plaintive and passive, ibsen's is
stoical and almost bracing. it is true that in this play he is no
longer the mere "indignation pessimist" whom dr. brandes quite justly
recognised in his earlier works. his analysis has gone deeper into the
heart of things, and he has put off the satirist and the iconoclast. but
there is in his thought an incompressible energy of revolt. a pessimist
in contemplation, he remains a meliorist in action. he is not, like mr.
hardy, content to let the flag droop half-mast high; his protagonist
still runs it up to the mast-head, and looks forward steadily to the
"heavy day of work" before him. but although the note of the conclusion
is resolute, almost serene, the play remains none the less an indictment
of nature, or at least of that egoism of passion which is one of her
most potent subtleties. in this view, allmers becomes a type of what
we may roughly call the "free moral agent"; eyolf, a type of humanity
conceived as passive and suffering, thrust will-less into existence,
with boundless aspirations and cruelly limited powers; rita, a type of
the egoistic instinct which is "a consuming fire"; and asta, a type of
the beneficent love which is possible only so long as it is exempt from
"the law of change." allmers, then, is self-conscious egoism, egoism
which can now and then break its chains, look in its own visage, realise
and shrink from itself; while rita, until she has passed through
the awful crisis which forms the matter of the play, is unconscious,
reckless, and ruthless egoism, exigent and jealous, "holding to its
rights," and incapable even of rising into the secondary stage of
maternal love. the offspring and the victim of these egoisms is eyolf,
"little wounded warrior," who longs to scale the heights and dive into
the depths, but must remain for ever chained to the crutch of human
infirmity. for years allmers has been a restless and half-reluctant
slave to rita's imperious temperament. he has dreamed and theorised
about "responsibility," and has kept eyolf poring over his books, in the
hope that, despite his misfortune, he may one day minister to parental
vanity. finally he breaks away from rita, for the first time "in all
these ten years," goes up "into the infinite solitudes," looks death in
the face, and returns shrinking from passion, yearning towards selfless
love, and filled with a profound and remorseful pity for the lot of poor
maimed humanity. he will "help eyolf to bring his desires into harmony
with what lies attainable before him." he will "create a conscious
happiness in his mind." and here the drama opens.

before the rat-wife enters, let me pause for a moment to point out that
here again ibsen adopts that characteristic method which, in writing of
_the lady from the sea_ and _the master builder_, i have compared to
the method of hawthorne. the story he tells is not really, or rather not
inevitably, supernatural. everything is explicable within this limits
of nature; but supernatural agency is also vaguely suggested, and the
reader's imagination is stimulated, without any absolute violence to his
sense of reality. on the plane of everyday life, then, the rat-wife is a
crazy and uncanny old woman, fabled by the peasants to be a were-wolf in
her leisure moments, who goes about the country killing vermin. coming
across an impressionable child, she tells him a preposterous tale,
adapted from the old "pied piper" legends, of her method of fascinating
her victims. the child, whose imagination has long dwelt on this
personage, is in fact hypnotised by her, follows her down to the sea,
and, watching her row away, turns dizzy, falls in, and is drowned. there
is nothing impossible, nothing even improbable, in this. at the same
time, there cannot be the least doubt, i think, that in the poet's mind
the rat-wife is the symbol of death, of the "still, soft darkness" that
is at once so fearful and so fascinating to humanity. this is clear not
only in the text of her single scene, but in the fact that allmers, in
the last act, treats her and his "fellow-traveller" of that night among
the mountains, not precisely as identical, but as interchangeable,
ideas. to tell the truth, i have even my own suspicions as to who is
meant by "her sweetheart," whom she "lured" long ago, and who is now
"down where all the rats are." this theory i shall keep to myself; it
may be purely fantastic, and is at best inessential. what is certain is
that death carries off little eyolf, and that, of all he was, only the
crutch is left, mute witness to his hapless lot.

he is gone; there was so little to bind him to life that he made not
even a moment's struggle against the allurement of the "long, sweet
sleep." then, for the first time, the depth of the egoism which had
created and conditioned his little life bursts upon his parents'
horror-stricken gaze. like accomplices in crime, they turn upon and
accuse each other--"sorrow makes them wicked and hateful." allmers, as
the one whose eyes were already half opened, is the first to carry war
into the enemy's country; but rita is not slow to retort, and presently
they both have to admit that their recriminations are only a vain
attempt to drown the voice of self-reproach. in a sort of fierce frenzy
they tear away veil after veil from their souls, until they realise that
eyolf never existed at all, so to speak, for his own sake, but only for
the sake of their passions and vanities. "isn't it curious," says rita,
summing up the matter, "that we should grieve like this over a little
stranger boy?"

in blind self-absorption they have played with life and death, and now
"the great open eyes" of the stranger boy will be for ever upon them.
allmers would fain take refuge in a love untainted by the egoism, and
unexposed to the revulsions, of passion. but not only is asta's pity
for rita too strong to let her countenance this desertion: she has
discovered that her relation to allmers is _not_ "exempt from the law of
change," and she "takes flight from him--and from herself." meanwhile
it appears that the agony which allmers and rita have endured in
probing their wounds has been, as halvard solness would say, "salutary
self-torture." the consuming fire of passion is now quenched, but "it,
has left an empty place within them," and they feel it common need "to
fill it up with something that is a little like love." they come to
remember that there are other children in the world on whom reckless
instinct has thrust the gift, of life--neglected children, stunted and
maimed in mind if not in body. and now that her egoism is seared to the
quick, the mother-instinct asserts itself in rita. she will take these
children to her--these children to whom her hand and her heart have
hitherto been closed. they shall be outwardly in eyolf's place, and
perhaps in time they may fill the place in her heart that should have
been eyolf's. thus she will try to "make her peace with the great open
eyes." for now, at last, she has divined the secret of the unwritten
book on "human responsibility" and has realised that motherhood
means--atonement.

so i read this terrible and beautiful work of art. this, i think, is _a_
meaning inherent in it--not perhaps _the_ meaning, and still less all
the meanings. indeed, its peculiar fascination for me, among all ibsen's
works, lies in the fact that it seems to touch life at so many different
points. but i must not be understood as implying that ibsen constructed
the play with any such definitely allegoric design as is here set forth.
i do not believe that this creator of men and women ever started from an
abstract conception. he did not first compose his philosophic tune and
then set his puppets dancing to it. the germ in his mind was dramatic,
not ethical; it was only as the drama developed that its meanings dawned
upon him; and he left them implicit and fragmentary, like the symbolism
of life itself, seldom formulated, never worked out with schematic
precision. he simply took a cutting from the tree of life, and, planting
it in the rich soil of his imagination, let it ramify and burgeon as it
would.

even if one did not know the date of _little eyolf_, one could
confidently assign it to the latest period of ibsen's career, on
noting a certain difference of scale between its foundations and its
superstructure. in his earlier plays, down to and including _hedda
gabler_, we feel his invention at work to the very last moment, often
with more intensity in the last act than in the first; in his later
plays he seems to be in haste to pass as early as possible from
invention to pure analysis. in this play, after the death of eyolf
(surely one of the most inspired "situations" in all drama) there is
practically no external action whatsoever. nothing happens save in the
souls of the characters; there is no further invention, but rather what
one may perhaps call inquisition. this does not prevent the second act
from being quite the most poignant or the third act from being one of
the most moving that ibsen ever wrote. far from wishing to depreciate
the play, i rate it more highly, perhaps, than most critics--among the
very greatest of ibsen's achievements. i merely note as a characteristic
of the poet's latest manner this disparity of scale between the work
foreshadowed, so to speak, and the work completed. we shall find it
still more evident in the case of _john gabriel borkman_.




little eyolf

(1894)




characters

     alfred allmers, landed proprietor and man of letters
        formerly a tutor.
     mrs. rita allmers, his wife.
     eyolf, their child, nine years old.
     miss asta allmers, alfred's younger half-sister.
     engineer borgheim.
     the rat-wife.

the action takes place on allmers's property, bordering on the fjord,
twelve or fourteen miles from christiania.


play in three acts




act first

[a pretty and richly-decorated garden-room, full of furniture, flowers,
and plants. at the back, open glass doors, leading out to a verandah. an
extensive view over the fiord. in the distance, wooded hillsides. a door
in each of the side walls, the one on the right a folding door, placed
far back. in front on the right, a sofa, with cushions and rugs. beside
the sofa, a small table, and chairs. in front, on the left, a larger
table, with arm-chairs around it. on the table stands an open hand-bag.
it is an early summer morning, with warm sunshine.]

[mrs. rita allmers stands beside the table, facing towards the
left, engaged in unpacking the bag. she is a handsome, rather tall,
well-developed blonde, about thirty years of age, dressed in a
light-coloured morning-gown.]

[shortly after, miss asta allmers enters by the door on the right,
wearing a light brown summer dress, with hat, jacket, and parasol. under
her arm she carries a locked portfolio of considerable size. she
is slim, of middle height, with dark hair, and deep, earnest eyes.
twenty-five years old.]

asta. [as she enters.] good-morning, my dear rita.

rita. [turns her head, and nods to her.] what! is that you, asta? come
all the way from town so early?

asta. [takes of her things, and lays them on a chair beside the door.]
yes, such a restless feeling came over me. i felt i must come out
to-day, and see how little eyolf was getting on--and you too. [lays the
portfolio on the table beside the sofa.] so i took the steamer, and here
i am.

rita. [smiling to her.] and i daresay you met one or other of your
friends on board? quite by chance, of course.

asta. [quietly.] no, i did not meet a soul i knew. [sees the bag.] why,
rita, what have you got there?

rita. [still unpacking.] alfred's travelling-bag. don't you recognise
it?

asta. [joyfully, approaching her.] what! has alfred come home?

rita. yes, only think--he came quite unexpectedly by the late train last
night.

asta. oh, then that was what my feeling meant! it was that that drew
me out here! and he hadn't written a line to let you know? not even a
post-card?

rita. not a single word.

asta. did he not even telegraph?

rita. yes, an hour before he arrived--quite curtly and coldly. [laughs.]
don't you think that was like him, asta?

asta. yes; he goes so quietly about everything.

rita. but that made it all the more delightful to have him again.

asta. yes, i am sure it would.

rita. a whole fortnight before i expected him!

asta. and is he quite well? not in low spirits?

rita. [closes the bag with a snap, and smiles at her.] he looked quite
transfigured as he stood in the doorway.

asta. and was he not the least bit tired either?

rita. oh, yes, he seemed to be tired enough--very tired, in fact. but,
poor fellow, he had come on foot the greater part of the way.

asta. and then perhaps the high mountain air may have been rather too
keen for him.

rita. oh, no; i don't think so at all. i haven't heard him cough once.

asta. ah, there you see now! it was a good thing, after all, that the
doctor talked him into taking this tour.

rita. yes, now that it is safely over.--but i can tell you it has been a
terrible time for me, asta. i have never cared to talk about it--and you
so seldom came out to see me, too--

asta. yes, i daresay that wasn't very nice of me--but--

rita. well, well, well, of course you had your school to attend to in
town. [smiling.] and then our road-maker friend--of course he was away
too.

asta. oh, don't talk like that, rita.

rita. very well, then; we will leave the road-maker out of the
question.--you can't think how i have been longing for alfred! how empty
the place seemed! how desolate! ugh, it felt as if there had been a
funeral in the house!

asta. why, dear me, only six or seven weeks--

rita. yes; but you must remember that alfred has never been away from
me before--never so much as twenty-four hours. not once in all these ten
years.

asta. no; but that is just why i really think it was high time he should
have a little outing this year. he ought to have gone for a tramp in the
mountains every summer--he really ought.

rita. [half smiling.] oh yes, it's all very well fair you to talk. if
i were as--as reasonable its you, i suppose i should have let him go
before--perhaps. but i positively could not, asta! it seemed to me i
should never get him back again. surely you can understand that?

asta. no. but i daresay that is because i have no one to lose.

rita. [with a teasing smile.] really? no one at all?

asta. not that _i_ know of. [changing the subject.] but tell me, rita,
where is alfred? is he still asleep?

rita. oh, not at all. he got up as early as ever to-day.

asta. then he can't have been so very tired after all.

rita. yes, he was last night--when he arrived. but now he has had little
eyolf with him in his room for a whole hour and more.

asta. poor little white-faced boy! has he to be for ever at his lessons
again?

rita. [with a slight shrug.] alfred will have it so, you know.

asta. yes; but i think you ought to put down your foot about it, rita.

rita. [somewhat impatiently.] oh no; come now, i really cannot meddle
with that. alfred knows so much better about these things than i do. and
what would you have eyolf do? he can't run about and play, you see--like
other children.

asta. [with decision.] i will talk to alfred about this.

rita. yes, do; i wish you would.--oh! here he is.

[alfred allmers, dressed in light summer clothes, enters by the door on
the left, leading eyolf by the hand. he is a slim, lightly-built man of
about thirty-six or thirty-seven, with gentle eyes, and thin brown hair
and beard. his expression is serious and thoughtful. eyolf wears a suit
cut like a uniform, with gold braid and gilt military buttons. he is
lame, and walks with a crutch under his left arm. his leg is shrunken.
he is undersized, and looks delicate, but has beautiful intelligent
eyes.]

allmers. [drops eyolf's hand, goes up to asta with an expression of
marked pleasure, and holds out both his hands to her.] asta! my dearest
asta! to think of your coming! to think of my seeing you so soon!

asta. i felt i must--. welcome home again!

allmers. [shaking her hands.] thank you for coming.

rita. doesn't he look well?

asta. [gazes fixedly at him.] splendid! quite splendid! his eyes are so
much brighter! and i suppose you have done a great deal of writing on
your travels? [with an outburst of joy.] i shouldn't wonder if you had
finished the whole book, alfred?

allmers. [shrugging his shoulders.] the book? oh, the book--

asta. yes, i was sure you would find it go so easily when once you got
away.

allmers. so i thought too. but, do you know, i didn't find it so at all.
the truth is, i have not written a line of the book.

asta. not a line?

rita. oho! i wondered when i found all the paper lying untouched in your
bag.

asta. but, my dear alfred, what have you been doing all this time?

allmers. [smiling.] only thinking and thinking and thinking.

rita. [putting her arm round his neck.] and thinking a little, too, of
those you had left at home?

allmers. yes, you may be sure of that. i have thought a great deal of
you--every single day.

rita. [taking her arm away.] ah, that is all i care about.

asta. but you haven't even touched the book! and yet you can look so
happy and contented! that is not what you generally do--i mean when your
work is going badly.

allmers. you are right there. you see, i have been such a fool hitherto.
all the best that is in you goes into thinking. what you put on paper is
worth very little.

asta. [exclaiming.] worth very little!

rita. [laughing.] what an absurd thing to say, alfred.

eyolf. [looks confidingly up at him.] oh yes, papa, what you write is
worth a great deal!

allmers. [smiling and stroking his hair.] well, well, since you say
so.--but i can tell you, some one is coming after me who will do it
better.

eyolf. who can that be? oh, tell me!

allmers. only wait--you may be sure he will come, and let us hear of
him.

eyolf. and what will you do then?

allmers. [seriously.] then i will go to the mountains again--

rita. fie, alfred! for shame!

allmers.--up to the peaks and the great waste places.

eyolf. papa, don't you think i shall soon be well enough for you to take
me with you?

allmers. [with painful emotion.] oh, yes, perhaps, my little boy.

eyolf. it would be so splendid, you know, if i could climb the
mountains, like you.

asta. [changing the subject.] why, how beautifully you are dressed
to-day, eyolf!

eyolf. yes, don't you think so, auntie?

asta. yes, indeed. is it in honour of papa that you have got your new
clothes on?

eyolf. yes, i asked mama to let me. i wanted so to let papa see me in
them.

allmers. [in a low voice, to rita.] you shouldn't have given him clothes
like that.

rita. [in a low voice.] oh, he has teased me so long about them--he had
set his heart on them. he gave me no peace.

eyolf. and i forgot to tell you, papa--borgheim has bought me a new bow.
and he has taught me how to shoot with it too.

allmers. ah, there now--that's just the sort of thing for you, eyolf.

eyolf. and next time he comes, i shall ask him to teach me to swim, too.

allmers. to swim! oh, what makes you want to learn swimming?

eyolf. well, you know, all the boys down at the beach can swim. i am the
only one that can't.

allmers. [with emotion, taking him in his arms.] you shall learn
whatever you like--everything you really want to.

eyolf. then do you know what i want most of all, papa?

allmers. no; tell me.

eyolf. i want most of all to be a soldier.

allmers. oh, little eyolf, there are many, many other things that are
better than that.

eyolf. ah, but when i grow big, then i shall have to be a soldier. you
know that, don't you?

allmers. [clenching his hands together.] well, well, well: we shall
see--

asta. [seating herself at the table on the left.] eyolf! come here to
me, and i will tell you something.

eyolf. [goes up to her.] what is it, auntie?

asta. what do you think, eyolf--i have seen the rat-wife.

eyolf. what! seen the rat-wife! oh, you're only making a fool of me!

asta. no; it's quite true. i saw her yesterday.

eyolf. where did you see her?

asta. i saw her on the road, outside the town.

allmers. i saw her, too, somewhere up in the country.

rita. [who is sitting on the sofa.] perhaps it will be out turn to see
her next, eyolf.

eyolf. auntie, isn't it strange that she should be called the rat-wife?

asta. oh, people just give her that name because she wanders round the
country driving away all the rats.

allmers. i have heard that her real name is varg.

eyolf. varg! that means a wolf, doesn't it?

allmers. [patting him on the head.] so you know that, do you?

eyolf. [cautiously.] then perhaps it may be true, after all, that she is
a were-wolf at night. do you believe that, papa?

allmers. oh, no; i don't believe it. now you ought to go and play a
little in the garden.

eyolf. should i not take some books with me?

allmers. no, no books after this. you had better go down to the beach to
the other boys.

eyolf. [shyly.] no, papa, i won't go down to the boys to-day.

allmers. why not?

eyolf. oh, because i have these clothes on.

allmers. [knitting his brows.] do you mean that they make fun of--of
your pretty clothes?

eyolf. [evasively.] no, they daren't--for then i would thrash them.

allmers. aha!--then why--?

eyolf. you see, they are so naughty, these boys. and then they say i can
never be a soldier.

allmers. [with suppressed indignation.] why do they say that, do you
think?

eyolf. i suppose they are jealous of me. for you know, papa, they are so
poor, they have to go about barefoot.

allmers. [softly, with choking voice.] oh, rita--how it wrings my heart!

rita. [soothingly, rising.] there, there, there!

allmers. [threateningly.] but these rascals shall soon find out who is
the master down at the beach!

asta. [listening.] there is some one knocking.

eyolf. oh, i'm sure it's borgheim!

rita. come in.

[the rat-wife comes softly and noiselessly in by the door on the right.
she is a thin little shrunken figure, old and grey-haired, with keen,
piercing eyes, dressed in an old-fashioned flowered gown, with a black
hood and cloak. she has in her hand a large red umbrella, and carries a
black bag by a loop over her arm.]

eyolf. [softly, taking hold of asta's dress.] auntie! that must surely
be her!

the rat-wife. [curtseying at the door.] i humbly beg pardon--but are
your worships troubled with any gnawing things in the house?

allmers. here? no, i don't think so.

the rat-wife. for it would be such a pleasure to me to rid your
worships' house of them.

rita. yes, yes; we understand. but we have nothing of the sort here.

the rat-wife. that's very unlucky, that is; for i just happened to be
on my rounds now, and goodness knows when i may be in these parts
again.--oh, how tired i am!

allmers. [pointing to a chair.] yes, you look tired.

the rat-wife. i know one ought never to get tired of doing good to the
poor little things that are hated and persecuted so cruelly. but it
takes your strength out of you, it does.

rita. won't you sit down and rest a little?

the rat-wife. i thank your ladyship with all my heart. [seats herself on
a chair between the door and the sofa.] i have been out all night at my
work.

allmers. have you indeed?

the rat-wife. yes, over on the islands. [with a chuckling laugh.] the
people sent for me, i can assure you. they didn't like it a bit; but
there was nothing else to be done. they had to put a good face on it,
and bite the sour apple. [looks at eyolf, and nods.] the sour apple,
little master, the sour apple.

eyolf. [involuntarily, a little timidly.] why did they have to--?

the rat-wife. what?

eyolf. to bite it?

the rat-wife. why, because they couldn't keep body and soul together
on account of the rats and all the little rat-children, you see, young
master.

rita. ugh! poor people! have they so many of them?

the rat-wife. yes, it was all alive and swarming with them. [laughs with
quiet glee.] they came creepy-crawly up into the beds all night long.
they plumped into the milk-cans, and they went pittering and pattering
all over the floor, backwards and forwards, and up and down.

eyolf. [softly, to asta.] i shall never go there, auntie.

the rat-wife. but then i came--i, and another along with me. and we took
them with us, every one--the sweet little creatures! we made an end of
every one of them.

eyolf. [with a shriek.] papa--look! look!

rita. good heavens, eyolf!

allmers. what's the matter?

eyolf. [pointing.] there's something wriggling in the bag!

rita. [at the extreme left, shrieks.] ugh! send her away, alfred.

the rat-wife. [laughing.] oh, dearest lady, you needn't be frightened of
such a little mannikin.

allmers. but what is the thing?

the rat-wife. why, it's only little mopsëman. [loosening the string of
the bag.] come up out of the dark, my own little darling friend.

[a little dog with a broad black snout pokes its head out of the bag.]

the rat-wife. [nodding and beckoning to eyolf.] come along, don't be
afraid, my little wounded warrior! he won't bite. come here! come here!

eyolf. [clinging to asta.] no, i dare not.

the rat-wife. don't you think he has a gentle, lovable countenance, my
young master?

eyolf. [astonished, pointing.] that thing there?

the rat-wife. yes, this thing here.

eyolf. [almost under his breath, staring fixedly at the dog.] i think he
has the horriblest--countenance i ever saw.

the rat-wife. [closing the bag.] oh, it will come--it will come, right
enough.

eyolf. [involuntarily drawing nearer, at last goes right up to her, and
strokes the bag.] but he is lovely--lovely all the same.

the rat-wife. [in a tone of caution.] but now he is so tired and weary,
poor thing. he's utterly tired out, he is. [looks at allmers.] for it
takes the strength out of you, that sort of game, i can tell you, sir.

allmers. what sort of game do you mean?

the rat-wife. the luring game.

allmers. do you mean that it is the dog that lures the rats?

the rat-wife. [nodding.] mopsëman and i--we two do it together. and it
goes so smoothly--for all you can see, at any rate. i just slip a string
through his collar, and then i lead him three times round the house, and
play on my pan's-pipes. when they hear that, they have got to come up
from the cellars, and down from the garrets, and out of flour boles, all
the blessed little creatures.

eyolf. and does he bite them to death then?

the rat-wife. oh, not at all! no, we go down to the boat, he and i
do--and then they follow after us, both the big ones and the little
ratikins.

eyolf. [eagerly.] and what then--tell me!

the rat-wife. then we push out from the land, and i scull with one
oar, and play on my pan's-pipes. and mopsëman, he swims behind. [with
glittering eyes.] and all the creepers and crawlers, they follow and
follow us out into the deep, deep waters. ay, for they have to.

eyolf. why do they have to?

the rat-wife. just because they want not to--just because they are so
deadly afraid of the water. that is why they have got to plunge into it.

eyolf. are they drowned, then?

the rat-wife. every blessed one. [more softly.] and there it is all as
still, and soft, and dark as their hearts can desire, the lovely little
things. down there they sleep a long, sweet sleep, with no one to hate
them or persecute them any more. [rises.] in the old days, i can tell
you, i didn't need any mopsëman. then i did the luring myself--i alone.

eyolf. and what did you lure then?

the rat-wife. men. one most of all.

eyolf. [with eagerness.] oh, who was that one? tell me!

the rat-wife. [laughing.] it was my own sweetheart, it was, little
heart-breaker!

eyolf. and where is he now, then?

the rat-wife. [harshly.] down where all the rats are. [resuming her
milder tone.] but now i must be off and get to business again. always on
the move. [to rita.] so your ladyship has no sort of use for me to-day?
i could finish it all off while i am about it.

rita. no, thank you; i don't think we require anything.

the rat-wife. well, well, your sweet ladyship, you can never tell.
if your ladyship should find that there is anything lure that keeps
nibbling and gnawing, and creeping and crawling, then just see and get
hold of me and mopsëman.--good-bye, good-bye, a kind good-bye to you
all. [she goes out by the door on the right.]

eyolf. [softly and triumphantly, to asta.] only think, auntie, now i
have seen the rat-wife too!

[rita goes out upon the verandah, and fans herself with her
pocket-handkerchief. shortly afterwards, eyolf slips cautiously and
unnoticed out to the right.]

allmers. [takes up the portfolio from the table by the sofa.] is this
your portfolio, asta?

asta. yes. i have some of the old letters in it.

allmers. ah, the family letters--

asta. you know you asked me to arrange them for you while you were away.

allmers. [pats her on the head.] and you have actually found time to do
that, dear?

asta. oh, yes. i have done it partly out here and partly at my own rooms
in town.

allmers. thanks, dear. did you find anything particular in them?

asta. [lightly.] oh, you know you always find something or other in such
old papers. [speaking lower and seriously.] it is the letters to mother
that are in this portfolio.

allmers. those, of course, you must keep yourself.

asta. [with an effort.] no; i am determined that you shall look through
them, too, alfred. some time--later on in life. i haven't the key of the
portfolio with me just now.

allmers. it doesn't matter, my dear asta, for i shall never read your
mother's letters in any case.

asta. [fixing her eyes on him.] then some time or other--some quiet
evening--i will tell you a little of what is in them.

allmers. yes, that will be much better. but do you keep your mother's
letters--you haven't so many mementos of her.

[he hands asta the portfolio. she takes it, and lays it on the chair
under her outdoor things. rita comes into the room again.]

rita. ugh! i feel as if that horrible old woman had brought a sort of
graveyard smell with her.

allmers. yes, she was rather horrible.

rita. i felt almost sick while she was in the room.

allmers. however, i can very well understand the sort of spellbound
fascination that she talked about. the loneliness of the mountain-peaks
and of the great waste places has something of the same magic about it.

asta. [looks attentively at him.] what is it that has happened to you,
alfred?

allmers. [smiling.] to me?

asta. yes, something has happened--something seems almost to have
transformed you. rita noticed it too.

rita. yes, i saw it the moment you came. a change for the better, i
hope, alfred?

allmers. it ought to be for the better. and it must and shall come to
good.

rita. [with an outburst.] you have had some adventure on your journey!
don't deny it! i can see it in your face!

allmers. [shaking his head.] no adventure in the world--outwardly at
least. but--

rita. [eagerly.] but--?

allmers. it is true that within me there has been something of a
revolution.

rita. oh heavens--!

allmers. [soothingly, patting her hand.] only for the better, my dear
rita. you may be perfectly certain of that.

rita. [seats herself on the sofa.] you must tell us all about it, at
once--tell us everything!

allmers. [turning to asta.] yes, let us sit down, too, asta. then i will
try to tell you as well as i can.

[he seats himself on the sofa at rita's side. asta moves a chair
forward, and places herself near him.]

rita. [looking at him expectantly.] well--?

allmers. [gazing straight before him.] when i look back over my
life--and my fortunes--for the last ten or eleven years, it seems to me
almost like a fairy-tale or a dream. don't you think so too, asta?

asta. yes, in many ways i think so.

allmers. [continuing.] when i remember what we two used to be, asta--we
two poor orphan children--

rita. [impatiently.] oh, that is such an old, old story.

allmers. [not listening to her.] and now here i am in comfort and
luxury. i have been able to follow my vocation. i have been able to work
and study--just as i had always longed to. [holds out his hand.] and all
this great--this fabulous good fortune we owe to you, my dearest rita.

rita. [half playfully, half angrily, slaps his hand.] oh, i do wish you
would stop talking like that.

allmers. i speak of it only as a sort of introduction.

rita. then do skip the introduction!

allmers. rita,--you must not think it was the doctor's advice that drove
me up to the mountains.

asta. was it not, alfred?

rita. what was it, then?

allmers. it was this: i found there was no more peace for me, there in
my study.

rita. no peace! why, who disturbed you?

allmers. [shaking his head.] no one from without. but i felt as though
i were positively abusing--or, say rather, wasting--my best
powers--frittering away the time.

asta. [with wide eyes.] when you were writing at your book?

allmers. [nodding.] for i cannot think that my powers are confined to
that alone. i must surely have it in me to do one or two other things as
well.

rita. was that what you sat there brooding over?

allmers. yes, mainly that.

rita. and so that is what has made you so discontented with yourself
of late; and with the rest of us as well. for you know you were
discontented, alfred.

allmers. [gazing straight before him.] there i sat bent over my table,
day after day, and often half the night too--writing and writing at the
great thick book on "human responsibility." h'm!

asta. [laying her hand upon his arm.] but, alfred--that book is to be
your life-work.

rita. yes, you have said so often enough.

allmers. i thought so. ever since i grew up, i have thought so. [with an
affectionate expression in his eyes.] and it was you that enabled me to
devote myself to it, my dear rita--

rita. oh, nonsense!

allmers. [smiling to her.]--you, with your gold, and your green
forests--

rita. [half laughing, half vexed.] if you begin all that rubbish again,
i shall beat you.

asta. [looking sorrowfully at him.] but the book, alfred?

allmers. it began, as it were, to drift away from me. but i was more and
more beset by the thought of the higher duties that laid their claims
upon me.

rita. [beaming, seizes his hand.] alfred!

allmers. the thought of eyolf, my dear rita.

rita. [disappointed, drops his hand.] ah--of eyolf!

allmers. poor little eyolf has taken deeper and deeper hold of me. after
that unlucky fall from the table--and especially since we have been
assured that the injury is incurable--

rita. [insistently.] but you take all the care you possibly can of him,
alfred!

allmers. as a schoolmaster, yes; but not as a father. and it is a father
that i want henceforth to be to eyolf.

rita. [looking at him and shaking her head.] i don't think i quite
understand you.

allmers. i mean that i will try with all my might to make his misfortune
as painless and easy to him as it can possibly be.

rita. oh, but, dear--thank heaven, i don't think he feels it so deeply.

asta. [with emotion.] yes, rita, he does.

allmers. yes, you may be sure he feels it deeply.

rita. [impatiently.] but, alfred, what more can you do for him?

allmers. i will try to perfect all the rich possibilities that are
dawning in his childish soul. i will foster all the germs of good in his
nature--make them blossom and bear fruit. [with more and more warmth,
rising.] and i will do more than that! i will help him to bring his
desires into harmony with what lies attainable before him. that is just
what at present they are not. all his longings are for things that
must for ever remain unattainable to him. but i will create a conscious
happiness in his mind. [he goes once or twice up and down the room. asta
and rita follow him with their eyes.]

rita. you should take these things more quietly, alfred!

allmers. [stops beside the table on the left, and looks at them.] eyolf
shall carry on my life-work--if he wants to. or he shall choose one
that is altogether his own. perhaps that would be best. at all events, i
shall let mine rest as it is.

rita. [rising.] but, alfred dear, can you not work both for yourself and
for eyolf?

allmers. no, i cannot. it is impossible! i cannot divide myself in this
matter--and therefore i efface myself. eyolf shall be the complete man
of our race. and it shall be my new life-work to make him the complete
man.

asta. [has risen and now goes up to him.] this must have cost you a
terribly hard struggle, alfred?

allmers. yes, it has. at home here, i should never have conquered
myself, never brought myself to the point of renunciation. never at
home!

rita. then that was why you went away this summer?

allmers. [with shining eyes.] yes! i went up into the infinite
solitudes. i saw the sunrise gleaming on the mountain peaks. i felt
myself nearer the stars--i seemed almost to be in sympathy and communion
with them. and then i found the strength for it.

asta. [looking sadly at him.] but you will never write any more of your
book on "human responsibility"?

allmers. no, never, asta. i tell you i cannot split up my life between
two vocations. but i will act out my "human responsibility"--in my own
life.

rita. [with a smile.] do you think you can live up to such high resolves
at home here?

allmers. [taking her hand.] with you to help me, i can. [holds out the
other hand.] and with you too, asta.

rita. [drawing her hand away.] ah--with both of us! so, after all, you
can divide yourself.

allmers. why, my dearest rita--!

[rita moves away from him and stands in the garden doorway. a light and
rapid knock is heard at the door on the right. engineer borgheim enters
quickly. he is a young man of a little over thirty. his expression is
bright and cheerful, and he holds himself erect.]

borgheim. good morning, mrs. allmers. [stops with an expression of
pleasure on seeing allmers.] why, what's this? home again already, mr.
allmers?

allmers. [shaking hands with him.] yes, i arrived list night.

rita. [gaily.] his leave was up, mr. borgheim.

allmers. no, you know it wasn't, rita--

rita. [approaching.] oh yes, but it was, though. his furlough had run
out.

borgheim. i see you hold your husband well in hand, mrs. allmers.

rita. i hold to my rights. and besides, everything must have an end.

borgheim. oh, not everything--i hope. good morning, miss allmers!

asta. [holding aloof from him.] good morning.

rita. [looking at borgheim.] not everything, you say?

borgheim. oh, i am firmly convinced that there are some things in the
world that will never come to an end.

rita. i suppose you are thinking of love--and that sort of thing.

borgheim. [warmly.] i am thinking of all that is lovely!

rita. and that never comes to an end. yes, let us think of that, hope
for that, all of us.

allmers. [coming up to them.] i suppose you will soon have finished your
road-work out here?

borgheim. i have finished it already--finished it yesterday. it has been
a long business, but, thank heaven, that has come to an end.

rita. and you are beaming with joy over that?

borgheim. yes, i am indeed!

rita. well, i must say--

borgheim. what, mrs. allmers?

rita. i don't think it is particularly nice of you, mr. borgheim.

borgheim. indeed! why not?

rita. well, i suppose we sha'n't often see you in these parts after
this.

borgheim. no, that is true. i hadn't thought of that.

rita. oh well, i suppose you will be able to look in upon us now and
then all the same.

borgheim. no, unfortunately that will be out of my power for a very long
time.

allmers. indeed! how so?

borgheim. the fact is, i have got a big piece of new work that i must
set about at once.

allmers. have you indeed?--[pressing his hand.]--i am heartily glad to
hear it.

rita. i congratulate you, mr. borgheim!

borgheim. hush, hush--i really ought not to talk openly of it as
yet! but i can't help coming out with it! it is a great piece of
road-making--up in the north--with mountain ranges to cross, and
the most tremendous difficulties to overcome!--[with an outburst of
gladness.]--oh, what a glorious world this is--and what a joy it is to
be a road-maker in it!

rita. [smiling, and looking teasingly at him.] is it road-making
business that has brought you out here to-day in such wild spirits?

borgheim. no, not that alone. i am thinking of all the bright and
hopeful prospects that are opening out before me.

rita. aha, then perhaps you have something still more exquisite in
reserve!

borgheim. [glancing towards asta.] who knows! when once happiness comes
to us, it is apt to come like it spring flood. [turns to asta.] miss
allmers, would you not like to take a little walk with me? as we used
to?

asta. [quickly.] no--no, thank you. not now. not to-day.

borgheim. oh, do come! only a little bit of a walk! i have so much i
want to talk to you about before i go.

rita. something else, perhaps, that you must not talk openly about as
yet?

borgheim. h'm, that depends--

rita. but there is nothing to prevent your whispering, you know. [half
aside.] asta, you must really go with him.

asta. but, my dear rita--

borgheim. [imploringly.] miss asta--remember it is to be a farewell
walk--the last for many a day.

asta. [takes her hat and parasol.] very well, suppose we take a stroll
in the garden, then.

borgheim. oh, thank you, thank you!

allmers. and while you are there you can see what eyolf is doing.

borgheim. ah, eyolf, by the bye! where is eyolf to-day? i've got
something for him.

allmers. he is out playing somewhere.

borgheim. is he really! then he has begun to play now? he used always to
be sitting indoors over his books.

allmers. there is to be an end of that now. i am going to make a regular
open-air boy of him.

borgheim. ah, now, that's right! out into the open air with him, poor
little fellow! good lord, what can we possibly do better than play
in this blessed world? for my part, i think all life is one long
playtime!--come, miss asta!

[borgheim and asta go out on the verandah and down through the garden.]

allmers. [stands looking after them.] rita--do you think there is
anything between those two?

rita. i don't know what to say. i used to think there was. but asta has
grown so strange to me--so utterly incomprehensible of late.

allmers. indeed! has she? while i have been away?

rita. yes, within the last week or two.

allmers. and you think she doesn't care very much about him now?

rita. not, seriously; not utterly and entirely; not unreservedly--i am
sure she doesn't. [looks searchingly at him.] would it displease you if
she did?

allmers. it would not exactly displease me. but it would certainly be a
disquieting thought--

rita. disquieting?

allmers. yes; you must remember that i am responsible for asta--for her
life's happiness.

rita. oh, come--responsible! surely asta has come to years of
discretion? i should say she was capable of choosing for herself.

allmers. yes, we must hope so, rita.

rita. for my part, i don't think at all ill of borgheim.

allmers. no, dear--no more do i--quite the contrary. but all the same--

rita. [continuing.] and i should be very glad indeed if he and asta were
to make a match of it.

allmers. [annoyed.] oh, why should you be?

rita. [with increasing excitement.] why, for then she would have to go
far, far away with him! anal she could never come out here to us, as she
does now.

allmers. [stares at her in astonishment.] what! can you really wish asta
to go away?

rita. yes, yes, alfred!

allmers. why in all the world--?

rita. [throwing her arms passionately round his neck.] for then, at
last, i should have you to myself alone! and yet--not even then!
not wholly to myself! [bursts into convulsive weeping.] oh, alfred,
alfred--i cannot give you up!

allmers. [gently releasing himself.] my dearest rita, do be reasonable!

rita. i don't care a bit about being reasonable! i care only for you!
only for you in all the world! [again throwing her arms round his neck.]
for you, for you, for you!

allmers. let me go, let me go--you are strangling me!

rita. [letting him go.] how i wish i could! [looking at him with
flashing eyes.] oh, if you knew how i have hated you--!

allmers. hated me--!

rita. yes--when you shut yourself up in your room and brooded over your
work--till long, long into the night. [plaintively.] so long, so late,
alfred. oh, how i hated your work!

allmers. but now i have done with that.

rita. [with a cutting laugh.] oh yes! now you have given yourself up to
something worse.

allmers. [shocked.] worse! do you call our child something worse?

rita. [vehemently.] yes, i do. as he comes between you and me, i call
him so. for the book--the book was not a living being, as the child is.
[with increasing impetuosity.] but i won't endure it, alfred! i will not
endure it--i tell you so plainly!

allmers. [looks steadily at her, and says in a low voice.] i am often
almost afraid of you, rita.

rita. [gloomily.] i am often afraid of myself. and for that very reason
you must not awake the evil in me.

allmers. why, good heavens, do i do that?

rita. yes, you do--when you tear to shreds the holiest bonds between us.

allmers. [urgently.] think what you're saying, rita. it is your own
child--our only child, that you are speaking of.

rita. the child is only half mine. [with another outburst.] but you
shall be mine alone! you shall be wholly mine! that i have a right to
demand of you!

allmers. [shrugging his shoulders.] oh, my dear rita, it is of no use
demanding anything. everything must be freely given.

rita. [looks anxiously at him.] and that you cannot do henceforth?

allmers. no, i cannot. i must divide myself between eyolf and you.

rita. but if eyolf had never been born? what then?

allmers. [evasively.] oh, that would be another matter. then i should
have only you to care for.

rita. [softly, her voice quivering.] then i wish he had never been born.

allmers. [flashing out.] rita! you don't know what you are saying!

rita. [trembling with emotion.] it was in pain unspeakable that i
brought him into the world. but i bore it all with joy and rapture for
your sake.

allmers. [warmly.] oh yes, i know, i know.

rita. [with decision.] but there it must end. i will live my
life--together with you--wholly with you. i cannot go on being only
eyolf's mother--only his mother and nothing more. i will not, i tell
you! i cannot! i will be all in all to you! to you, alfred!

allmers. but that is just what you are, rita. through our child--

rita. oh--vapid, nauseous phrases--nothing else! no, alfred, i am not to
be put off like that. i was fitted to become the child's mother, but not
to be a mother to him. you must take me as i am, alfred.

allmers. and yet you used to be so fond of eyolf.

rita. i was so sorry for him--because you troubled yourself so little
about him. you kept him reading and grinding at books. you scarcely even
saw him.

allmers. [nodding slowly.] no; i was blind. the time had not yet come
for me--

rita. [looking in his face.] but now, i suppose, it has come?

allmers. yes, at, last. now i see that the highest task i can have in
the world is to be a true father to eyolf.

rita. and to me?--what will you be to me?

allmers. [gently.] i will always go on caring for you--with calm, deep
tenderness. [ he tries to take her hands.]

rita. [evading him.] i don't care a bit for your calm, deep tenderness.
i want you utterly and entirely--and alone! just as i had you in the
first rich, beautiful days. [vehemently and harshly.] never, never will
i consent to be put off with scraps and leavings, alfred!

allmers. [in a conciliatory tone.] i should have thought there was
happiness in plenty for all three of us, rita.

rita. [scornfully.] then you are easy to please. [seats herself at the
table on the left.] now listen to me.

allmers. [approaching.] well, what is it?

rita. [looking up at him with a veiled glow in her eyes.] when i got
your telegram yesterday evening--

allmers. yes? what then?

rita.--then i dressed myself in white--

allmers. yes, i noticed you were in white when i arrived.

rita. i had let down my hair--

allmers. your sweet masses of hair--

rita.--so that it flowed down my neck and shoulders--

allmers. i saw it, i saw it. oh, how lovely you were, rita!

rita. there were rose-tinted shades over both the lamps. and we were
alone, we two--the only waking beings in the whole house. and there was
champagne on the table.

allmers. i did not drink any of it.

rita. [looking bitterly at him.] no, that is true. [laughs harshly.]
"there stood the champagne, but you tasted it not"--as the poet says.

[she rises from the armchair, goes with an air of weariness over to the
sofa, and seats herself, half reclining, upon it.]

allmers. [crosses the room and stands before her.] i was so taken up
with serious thoughts. i had made up my mind to talk to you of our
future, rita--and first and foremost of eyolf.

rita. [smiling.] and so you did--

allmers. no, i had not time to--for you began to undress.

rita. yes, and meanwhile you talked about eyolf. don't you remember? you
wanted to know all about little eyolf's digestion.

allmers. [looking reproachfully at her.] rita--!

rita. and then you got into your bed, and slept the sleep of the just.

allmers. [shaking his head.] rita--rita!

rita. [lying at full length and looking up at him.] alfred?

allmers. yes?

rita. "there stood your champagne, but you tasted it not."

allmers. [almost harshly.] no. i did not taste it.

[he goes away from her and stands in the garden doorway. rita lies for
some time motionless, with closed eyes.]

rita. [suddenly springing up.] but let me tell you one thing, alfred.

allmers. [turning in the doorway.] well?

rita. you ought not to feel quite so secure as you do!

allmers. not secure?

rita. no, you ought not to be so indifferent! not certain of your
property in me!

allmers. [drawing nearer.] what do you mean by that?

rita. [with trembling lips.] never in a single thought have i been
untrue to you, alfred! never for an instant.

allmers. no, rita, i know that--i, who know you so well.

rita. [with sparkling eyes.] but if you disdain me--!

allmers. disdain! i don't understand what you mean!

rita. oh, you don't know all that might rise up within me, if--

allmers. if?

rita. if i should ever see that you did not care for me--that you did
not love me as you used to.

allmers. but, my dearest rita--years bring a certain change with
them--and that must one day occur even in us--as in every one else.

rita. never in me! and i will not hear of any change in you either--i
could not bear it, alfred. i want to keep you to myself alone.

allmers. [looking at her with concern.] you have a terribly jealous
nature--

rita. i can't make myself different from what i am. [threateningly.] if
you go and divide yourself between me and any one else--

allmers. what then--?

rita. then i will take my revenge on you, alfred!

allmers. how "take your revenge"?

rita. i don't know how.--oh yes, i do know, well enough!

allmers. well?

rita. i will go and throw myself away--

allmers. throw yourself away, do you say?

rita. yes, that i will. i'll throw myself straight into the arms of of
the first man that comes in my way--

allmers. [looking tenderly at her and shaking his head.] that you will
never do--my loyal, proud, true-hearted rita!

rita. [putting her arms round his neck.] oh, you don't know what i might
come to be if you--if you did not love me any more.

allmers. did not love you, rita? how can you say such a thing!

rita. [half laughing, lets him go.] why should i not spread my nets for
that--that road-maker man that hangs about here?

allmers. [relieved.] oh, thank goodness--you are only joking.

rita. not at all. he would do as well as any one else.

allmers. ah, but i suspect he is more or less taken up already.

rita. so much the better! for then i should take him away from some one
else; and that is just what eyolf has done to me.

allmers. can you say that our little eyolf has done that?

rita. [pointing with her forefinger.] there, you see! you see! the
moment you mention eyolf's name, you grow tender and your voice quivers!
[threateningly, clenching her hands.] oh, you almost tempt we to wish--

allmers. [looking at her anxiously.] what do i tempt you to wish,
rita?--

rita. [vehemently, going away from him.] no, no, no--i won't tell you
that! never!

allmers. [drawing nearer to her.] rita! i implore you--for my sake and
for your own--do not let yourself he tempted into evil.

[borgheim and asta come up from the garden. they both show signs of
restrained emotion. they look serious and dejected. asta remains out on
the verandah. borgheim comes into the room.]

borgheim. so that is over--miss allmers and i have had our last walk
together.

rita. [looks at him with surprise.] ah! and there is no longer journey
to follow the walk?

borgheim. yes, for me.

rita. for you alone?

borgheim. yes, for me alone.

rita. [glances darkly at allmers.] do you hear that? [turns to
borgheim.] i'll wager it is some one with the evil eye that has played
you this trick.

borgheim. [looks at her.] the evil eye?

rita. [nodding.] yes, the evil eye.

borgheim. do you believe in the evil eye, mrs. allmers?

rita. yes. i have begun to believe in the evil eye. especially in a
child's evil eye.

allmers. [shocked, whispers.] rita--how can you--?

rita. [speaking low.] it is you that make me so wicked and hateful,
alfred.

[confused cries and shrieks are heard in the distance, from the
direction of the fiord.]

borgheim. [going to the glass door.] what noise is that?

asta. [in the doorway.] look at all those people running down to the
pier!

allmers. what can it be? [looks out for a moment.] no doubt it's those
street urchins at some mischief again.

borgheim. [calls, leaning over the verandah railings.] i say, you boys
down there! what's the matter?

[several voices are heard answering indistinctly and confusedly.]

rita. what do they say?

borgheim. they say it's a child that's drowned.

allmers. a child drowned?

asta. [uneasily.] a little boy, they say.

allmers. oh, they can all swim, every one of them.

rita. [shrieks in terror.] where is eyolf?

allmers. keep quiet--quiet. eyolf is down in the garden, playing.

asta. no, he wasn't in the garden.

rita. [with upstretched arms.] oh, if only it isn't he!

borgheim. [listens, and calls down.] whose child is it, do you say?

[indistinct voices are heard. borgheim and asta utter a suppressed cry,
and rush out through the garden.]

allmers. [in an agony of dread.] it isn't eyolf! it isn't eyolf, rita!

rita. [on the verandah, listening.] hush! be quiet! let me hear what
they are saying!

[rita rushes back with a piercing shriek, into the room.]

allmers. [following her.] what did they say?

rita. [sinking down beside the armchair on the left.] they said: "the
crutch is floating!"

allmers. [almost paralysed.] no! no! no!

rita. [hoarsely.] eyolf! eyolf! oh, but they must save him!

allmers. [half distracted.] they must, they must! so precious a life!

[he rushes down through the garden.]




act second

[a little narrow glen by the side of the fiord, on allmers's property.
on the left, lofty old trees overarch the spot. down the slope in the
background a brook comes leaping, and loses itself among the stones on
the margin of the wood. a path winds along by the brook-side. to the
right there are only a few single trees, between which the fiord is
visible. in front is seen the corner of a boat-shed with a boat drawn
up. under the old trees on the left stands a table with a bench and one
or two chairs, all made of thin birch-staves. it is a heavy, damp day,
with driving mist wreaths.]

[alfred allmers, dressed as before, sits on the bench, leaning his arms
on the table. his hat lies before him. he gazes absently and immovably
out over the water.]

[presently asta allmers comes down the woodpath. she is carrying an open
umbrella.]

asta. [goes quietly and cautiously up to him.] you ought not to sit down
here in this gloomy weather, alfred.

allmers. [nods slowly without answering.]

asta. [closing her umbrella.] i have been searching for you such a long
time.

allmers. [without expression.] thank you.

asta. [moves a chair and seats herself close to him.] have you been
sitting here long? all the time?

allmers. [does not answer at first. presently he says.] no, i cannot
grasp it. it seems so utterly impossible.

asta. [laying her hand compassionately on his arm.] poor alfred!

allmers. [gazing at her.] is it really true then, asta? or have i gone
mad? or am i only dreaming? oh, if it were only a dream! just think, if
i were to waken now!

asta. oh, if i could only waken you!

allmers. [looking out over the water.] how pitiless the fiord looks
to-day, lying so heavy and drowsy--leaden-grey--with splashes of
yellow--and reflecting the rain-clouds.

asta. [imploringly.] oh, alfred, don't sit staring out over the fiord!

allmers. [not heeding her.] over the surface, yes. but in the
depths--there sweeps the rushing undertow--

asta. [in terror.] oh, for god's sake don't think of the depths!

allmers. [looking gently at her.] i suppose you think he is lying close
outside here? but he is not, asta. you must not think that. you must
remember how fiercely the current sweeps gut here straight to the open
sea.

asta. [throws herself forward against the table, and, sobbing, buries
her face in her hands.] oh, god! oh, god!

allmers. [heavily.] so you see, little eyolf has passed so far--far away
from us now.

asta. [looks imploringly up at him.] oh, alfred, don't say such things!

allmers. why, you can reckon it out for yourself--you that are so
clever. in eight-and-twenty hours--nine-and-twenty hours--let me see--!
let me see--!

asta. [shrieking and stopping her ears.] alfred!

allmers. [clenching his hand firmly upon the table.] can you conceive
the meaning of a thing like this?

asta. [looks at him.] of what?

allmers. of this that has been done to rita and me.

asta. the meaning of it?

allmers. [impatiently.] yes, the meaning, i say. for, after all, there
must be a meaning in it. life, existence--destiny, cannot be so utterly
meaningless.

asta. oh, who can say anything with certainty about these things, my
dear alfred?

allmers. [laughs bitterly.] no, no; i believe you are right there.
perhaps the whole thing goes simply by hap-hazard--taking its own
course, like a drifting wreck without a rudder. i daresay that is how it
is. at least, it seems very like it.

asta. [thoughtfully.] what if it only seems--?

allmers. [vehemently.] ah? perhaps you can unravel the mystery for me?
i certainly cannot. [more gently.] here is eyolf, just entering
upon conscious life: full of such infinite possibilities--splendid
possibilities perhaps: he would have filled my life with pride and
gladness. and then a crazy old woman has only to come this way--and show
a cur in a bag--

asta. but we don't in the least know how it really happened.

allmers. yes, we do. the boys saw her row out over the fiord. they saw
eyolf standing alone at the very end of the pier. they saw him gazing
after her--and then he seemed to turn giddy. [quivering.] and that was
how he fell over--and disappeared.

asta. yes, yes. but all the same--

allmers. she has drawn him down into the depths--that you may be sure
of, dear.

asta. but, alfred, why should she?

allmers. yes, that is just the question! why should she? there is no
retribution behind it all--no atonement, i mean. eyolf never did her any
harm. he never called names after her; he never threw stones at her dog.
why, he had never set eyes either on her or her dog till yesterday.
so there is no retribution; the whole thing is utterly groundless and
meaningless, asta.--and yet the order of the world requires it.

asta. have you spoken to rita of these things?

allmers. [shakes his head.] i feel as if i can talk better to you about
them. [drawing a deep breath.] and about everything else as well.

[asta takes serving-materials and a little paper parcel out of her
pocket. allmers sits looking on absently.]

allmers. what leave you got there, asta?

asta. [taking his hat.] some black crap.

allmers. oh, whet is the use of that?

asta. rita asked me to put it on. may i?

allmers. oh, yes; as far as i'm concerned--[she sews the crape on his
hat.]

allmers. [sitting and looking at her.] where is rita?

asta. she is walking about the garden a little, i think. borgheim is
with her.

allmers. [slightly surprised.] indeed! is borgheim out here to-day
again?

asta. yes. he came out by the mid-day train.

allmers. i didn't expect that.

asta. [serving.] he was so fond of eyolf.

allmers. borgheim is a faithful soul, asta.

asta. [with quiet warmth.] yes, faithful he is, indeed. that is certain.

allmers. [fixing his eyes upon her.] you are really fond of him?

asta. yes, i am.

allmers. and yet you cannot make up your mind to--?

asta. [interrupting.] oh, my dear alfred, don't talk of that!

allmers. yes, yes; tell me why you cannot?

asta. oh, no! please! you really must not ask me. you see, it's so
painful for me.--there now! the hat is done.

allmers. thank you.

asta. and now for the left arm.

allmers. am i to have crape on it too?

asta. yes, that is the custom.

allmers. well--as you please.

[she moves close up to him and begins to sew.]

asta. keep your arm still--then i won't prick you.

allmers. [with a half-smile.] this is like the old days.

asta. yes, don't you think so?

allmers. when you were a little girl you used to sit just like this,
mending my clothes. the first thing you ever sewed for me--that was
black crape, too.

asta. was it?

allmers. round my student's cap--at the time of father's death.

asta. could i sew then? fancy, i have forgotten it.

allmers. oh, you were such a little thing then.

asta. yes, i was little then.

allmers. and then, two years afterwards--when we lost your mother--then
again you sewed a big crape band on my sleeve.

asta. i thought it was the right thing to do.

allmers. [patting her hand.] yes, yes, it was the right thing to do,
asta. and then when we were left alone in the world, we two--. are you
done already?

asta. yes. [putting together her sewing-materials.] it was really a
beautiful time for us, alfred. we two alone.

allmers. yes, it was--though we had to toil so hard.

asta. you toiled.

allmers. [with more life.] oh, you toiled too, in your way, i can assure
you--[smiling]--my dear, faithful--eyolf.

asta. oh--you mustn't remind me of that stupid nonsense about the name.

allmers. well, if you had been a boy, you would have been called eyolf.

asta. yes, if! but when you began to go to college--. [smiling
involuntarily.] i wonder how you could be so childish.

allmers. was it i that was childish?

asta. yes, indeed, i think it was, as i look back upon it all. you were
ashamed of having no brother--only a sister.

allmers. no, no, it was you, dear--you were ashamed.

asta. oh yes, i too, perhaps--a little. and somehow or other i was sorry
for you--

allmers. yes, i believe you were. and then you hunted up some of my old
boy's clothes--

asta. your fine sunday clothes--yes. do you remember the blue blouse and
knickerbockers?

allmers. [his eyes dwelling upon her.] i remember so well how you looked
when you used to wear them.

asta. only when we were at home, alone, though.

allmers. and how serious we were, dear, and how mightily pleased with
ourselves. i always called you eyolf.

asta. oh, alfred, i hope you have never told rita this?

allmers. yes, i believe i did once tell her.

asta. oh, alfred, how could you do that?

allmers. well, you see--one tells one's wife everything--very nearly.

asta. yes, i suppose one does.

allmers. [as if awakening, clutches at his forehead and starts up.] oh,
how can i sit here and--

asta. [rising, looks sorrowfully at him.] what is the matter?

allmers. he had almost passed away from me. he had passed quite away.

asta. eyolf!

allmers. here i sat, living in these recollections--and he had no part
in them.

asta. yes, alfred--little eyolf was behind it all.

allmers. no, he was not. he slipped out of my memory--out of my
thoughts. i did not see him for a moment as we sat here talking. i
utterly forgot him all that time.

asta. but surely you must take some rest in your sorrow.

allmers. no, no, no; that is just what i will not do! i must not--i
have no right--and no heart for it, either. [going in great excitement
towards the right.] all my thoughts must be out there, where he lies
drifting in the depths!

asta. [following him and holding him back.] alfred--alfred! don't go to
the fiord.

allmers. i must go out to him! let me go, asta! i will take the boat.

asta. [in terror.] don't go to the fiord, i say!

allmers. [yielding.] no, no--i will not. only let me alone.

asta. [leading him back to the table.] you must rest from your thoughts,
alfred. come here and sit down.

allmers. [making as if to seat himself on the bench.] well, well--as you
please.

asta. no, i won't let you sit there.

allmers. yes, let me.

asta. no, don't. for then you will only sit looking out--[forces him
down upon a chair, with his back to the right.] there now. now that's
right. [seats herself upon the bench.] and now we can talk a little
again.

allmers. [drawing a deep breath audibly.] it was good to deaden the
sorrow and heartache for a moment.

asta. you insist do so, alfred.

allmers. but don't you think it is terribly weak and unfeeling of me--to
be able to do so?

asta. oh, no--i am sure it is impossible to keep circling for ever round
one fixed thought.

allmers. yes, for me it is impossible. before you came to me, here i
sat, torturing myself unspeakably with this crushing, gnawing sorrow--

asta. yes?

allmers. and would you believe it, asta--? h'm--

asta. well?

allmers. in the midst of all the agony, i found myself speculating what
we should have for dinner to-day.

asta. [soothingly.] well, well, if only it rests you to--

allmers. yes, just fancy, dear--it seemed as if it did give me rest.
[holds out, his hand to her across the table.] how good it is, asta,
that i have you with me. i am so glad of that. glad, glad--even in my
sorrow.

asta. [looking earnestly at him.] you ought most of all to be glad that
you have rita.

allmers. yes, of course i should. but rita is no kin to me--it isn't
like having a sister.

asta. [eagerly.] do you say that, alfred?

allmers. yes, our family is a thing apart. [half jestingly.] we have
always had vowels for our initials. don't you remember how often we used
to speak of that? and all our relations--all equally poor. and we have
all the same colour of eyes.

asta. do you think i have--?

allmers. no, you take entirely after your mother. you are not in the
least like the rest of us--not even like father. but all the same--

asta. all the same--?

allmers. well, i believe that living together has, as it were, stamped
us in each other's image--mentally, i mean.

asta. [with warm emotion.] oh, you must never say that, alfred. it is
only i that have taken my stamp from you; and it is to you that i owe
everything--every good thing in the world.

allmers. [shaking his head.] you owe me nothing, asta. on the contrary--

asta. i owe you everything! you must never doubt that. no sacrifice has
been too great for you--

allmers. [interrupting.] oh, nonsense--sacrifice! don't talk of such a
thing.--i have only loved you, asta, ever since you were a little child.
[after a short pause.] and then it always seemed to me that i had so
much injustice to make up to you for.

asta. [astonished.] injustice? you?

allmers. not precisely on my own account. but--

asta. [eagerly.] but--?

allmers. on father's.

asta. [half rising from the bench.] on--father's! [sitting down again.]
what do you mean by that, alfred?

allmers. father was never really kind to you.

asta. [vehemently.] oh, don't say that!

allmers. yes, it is true. he did not love you--not as he ought to have.

asta. [evasively.] no, perhaps not as he loved you. that was only
natural.

allmers. [continuing.] and he was often hard to your mother, too--at
least in the last years.

asta. [softly.] mother was so much, much younger than he--remember that.

allmers. do you think they were not quite suited to each other?

asta. perhaps not.

allmers. yes, but still--. father, who in other ways was so gentle and
warm-hearted--so kindly towards every one--

asta. [quietly.] mother, too, was not always as she ought to have been.

allmers. your mother was not!

asta. perhaps not always.

allmers. towards father, do you mean?

asta. yes.

allmers. i never noticed that.

asta. [struggling with her tears, rises.] oh, my dear alfred--let them
rest--those who are gone. [she goes towards the right.]

allmers. [rising.] yes, let them rest. [wringing his hands.] but those
who are gone--it is they that won't let us rest, asta. neither day nor
night.

asta. [looks warmly at him.] time will make it all seem easier, alfred.

allmers. [looking helplessly at her.] yes, don't you think it will?--but
how i am to get over these terrible first days [hoarsely.]--that is what
i cannot imagine.

asta. [imploringly, laying her hands on his shoulders.] go up to rita.
oh, please do--

allmers. [vehemently, withdrawing from her.] no, no, no--don't talk to
me of that! i cannot, i tell you. [more calmly.] let me remain here,
with you.

asta. well, i will not leave you.

allmers. [seizing her hand and holding it fast.] thank you for that!
[looks out for a time over the fiord.] where is my little eyolf now?
[smiling sadly to her.] can you tell me that my big, wise eyolf?
[shaking his head.] no one in all the world can tell me that. i know
only this one terrible thing--that he is gone from me.

asta. [looking up to the left, and withdrawing her hand.] here they are
coming.

[mrs. allmers and engineer borgheim come down by the wood-path, she
leading the way. she wears a dark dress and a black veil over her head.
he has an umbrella under his arm.]

allmers. [going to meet her.] how is it with you, rita?

rita. [passing him.] oh, don't ask.

allmers. why do you come here?

rita. only to look for you. what are you doing?

allmers. nothing. asta came down to me.

rita. yes, but before asta came? you have been away from me all the
morning.

allmers. i have been sitting here looking out over the water.

rita. ugh,--how can you?

allmers. [impatiently.] i like best to be alone now.

rita. [moving restlessly about.] and then to sit still! to stay in one
place!

allmers. i have nothing in the world to move for.

rita. i cannot bear to be anywhere long. least of all here--with the
fiord at my very feet.

allmers. it is just the nearness of the fiord--

rita. [to borgheim.] don't you think he should come back with the rest
of us?

borgheim. [to allmers.] i believe it would be better for you.

allmers. no, no; let me stay where i am.

rita. then i will stay with you, alfred.

allmers. very well; do so, then. you remain too, asta.

asta. [whispers to borgheim.] let us leave them alone!

borgheim. [with a glance of comprehension.] miss allmers, shall we go a
little further--along the shore? for the very last time?

asta. [taking her umbrella.] yes, come. let us go a little further.

[asta and borgheim go out together behind the boat-shed. allmers wanders
about for a little. then he seats himself on a stone under the trees on
the left.]

rita. [comes up and stands before him, her hands folded and hanging
down.] can you think the thought, alfred--that we have lost eyolf?

allmers. [looking sadly at the ground.] we must accustom ourselves to
think it.

rita. i cannot. i cannot. and then that horrible sight that will haunt
me all my life long.

allmers. [looking up.] what sight? what have you seen?

rita. i have seen nothing myself. i have only heard it told. oh--!

allmers. you may as well tell me at once.

rita. i got borgheim to go down with me to the pier--

allmers. what did you want there?

rita. to question the boys as to how it happened.

allmers. but we know that.

rita. we got to know more.

allmers. well?

rita. it is not true that he disappeared all at once.

allmers. do they say that now?

rita. yes. they say they saw him lying down on the bottom. deep down in
the clear water.

allmers. [grinding his teeth.] and they didn't save him!

rita. i suppose they could not.

allmers. they could swim--every one of them. did they tell you how he
was lying whilst they could see him?

rita. yes. they said he was lying on his back. and with great, open
eyes.

allmers. open eyes. but quite still?

rita. yes, quite still. and then something came and swept him away. they
called it the undertow.

allmers. [nodding slowly.] so that was the last they saw of him.

rita. [suffocated with tears.] yes.

allmers. [in a dull voice.] and never--never will any one see him again.

rita. [wailing.] i shall see him day and night, as he lay down there.

allmers. with great, open eyes.

rita. [shuddering.] yes, with great, open eyes. i see them! i see them
now!

allmers. [rises slowly and looks with quiet menace at her.] were they
evil, those eyes, rita?

rita. [turning pale.] evil--!

allmers. [going close up to her.] were they evil eyes that stared up? up
from the depths?

rita. [shrinking from him.] alfred--!

allmers. [following her.] answer me! were they a child's evil eyes?

rita. [shrieks.] alfred! alfred!

allmers. now things have come about--just as you wished, rita.

rita. i! what did i wish?

allmers. that eyolf were not here.

rita. never for a moment have i wished that! that eyolf should not stand
between us--that was what i wished.

allmers. well, well--he does not stand between us any more.

rita. [softly, gazing straight before her.] perhaps now more than ever.
[with a sudden shudder.] oh, that horrible sight!

allmers. [nods.] the child's evil eyes.

rita. [in dread, recoiling from him.] let me be, alfred! i am afraid of
you. i have never seen you like this before.

allmers. [looks harshly and coldly at her.] sorrow makes us wicked and
hateful.

rita. [terrified, and yet defiant.] that is what i feel, too.

[allmers goes towards the right and looks out over the fiord. rita seats
herself at the table. a short pause.]

allmers. [turning his head towards her.] you never really and truly
loved him--never!

rita. [with cold self-control.] eyolf would never let me take him really
and truly to my heart.

allmers. because you did not want to.

rita. oh yes, i did. i did want to. but some one stood in the way--even
from the first.

allmers. [turning right round.] do you mean that _i_ stood in the way?

rita. oh, no--not at first.

allmers. [coming nearer her.] who, then?

rita. his aunt.

allmers. asta?

rita. yes. asta stood and barred the way for me.

allmers. can you say that, rita?

rita. yes. asta--she took him to her heart--from the moment that
happened--that miserable fall.

allmers. if she did so, she did it in love.

rita. [vehemently.] that is just it! i cannot endure to share anything
with any one! not in love.

allmers. we two should have shared him between us in love.

rita. [looking scornfully at him.] we? oh, the truth is you have never
had any real love for him either.

allmers. [looks at her in astonishment.] _i_ have not--!

rita. no, you have not. at first you were so utterly taken up by that
book of yours--about responsibility.

allmers. [forcibly.] yes, i was. but my very book--i sacrificed for
eyolf's sake.

rita. not out of love for him.

allmers. why then, do you suppose?

rita. because you were consumed with mistrust of yourself. because you
had begun to doubt whether you had any great vocation to live for in the
world.

allmers. [observing her closely.] could you see that in me?

rita. oh, yes--little by little. and then you needed something new to
fill up your life.--it seems _i_ was not enough for you any longer.

allmers. that is the law of change, rita.

rita. and that was why you wanted to make a prodigy of poor little
eyolf.

allmers. that was not what i wanted. i wanted to make a happy human
being of him.--that, and nothing more.

rita. but not out of love for him. look into yourself! [with a certain
shyness of expression.] search out all that lies under--and behind your
action.

allmers. [avoiding her eyes.] there is something you shrink from saying.

rita. and you too.

allmers. [looks thoughtfully at her.] if it is as you say, then we two
have never really possessed our own child.

rita. no. not in perfect love.

allmers. and yet we are sorrowing so bitterly for him.

rita. [with sarcasm.] yes, isn't it curious that we should grieve like
this over a little stranger boy?

allmers. [with an outburst.] oh, don't call him a stranger!

rita. [sadly shaking her head.] we never won the boy, alfred. not i--nor
you either.

allmers. [wringing his hands.] and now it is too late! too late!

rita. and no consolation anywhere--in anything.

allmers. [with sudden passion.] you are the guilty one in this!

rita. [rising.] i!

allmers. yes, you! it was your fault that he became--what he was! it was
your fault that he could not save himself when he fell into the water.

rita. [with a gesture of repulsion.] alfred--you shall not throw the
blame upon me!

allmers. [more and more beside himself.] yes, yes, i do! it was you that
left the helpless child unwatched upon the table.

rita. he was lying so comfortably among the cushions, and sleeping so
soundly. and you had promised to look after him.

allmers. yes, i had. [lowering his voice.] but then you came--you, you,
you--and lured me to you.

rita. [looking defiantly at him.] oh, better own at once that you forgot
the child and everything else.

allmers. [in suppressed desperation.] yes, that is true. [lower.] i
forgot the child--in your arms!

rita. [exasperated.] alfred! alfred--this is intolerable of you!

allmers. [in a low voice, clenching his fists before her face.] in that
hour you condemned little eyolf to death.

rita. [wildly.] you, too! you, too--if it is as you say!

allmers. oh yes--call me to account, too--if you will. we have sinned,
both of us. and so, after all, there was retribution in eyolf's death.

rita. retribution?

allmers. [with more self-control.] yes. judgment upon you and me. now,
as we stand here, we have our deserts. while he lived, we let ourselves
shrink away from him in secret, abject remorse. we could not bear to see
it--the thing he had to drag with him--

rita. [whispers.] the crutch.

allmers. yes, that. and now, what we now call sorrow and heartache--is
really the gnawing of conscience, rita. nothing else.

rita. [gazing helplessly at him.] i feel as if all this must end in
despair--in madness for both of us. for we can never--never make it good
again.

allmers. [passing into a calmer mood.] i dreamed about eyolf last night.
i thought i saw him coming up from the pier. he could run like other
boys. so nothing had happened to him--neither the one thing nor the
other. and the torturing reality was nothing but a dream, i thought. oh,
how i thanked and blessed--[checking himself.] h'm!

rita. [looking at him.] whom?

allmers. [evasively.] whom--?

rita. yes; whom did you thank and bless?

allmers. [putting aside the question.] i was only dreaming, you know--

rita. one whom you yourself do not believe in?

allmers. that was how i felt, all the same. of course, i was sleeping--

rita. [reproachfully.] you should not have taught me to doubt, alfred.

allmers. would it leave been right of me to let you go through life with
your mind full of empty fictions?

rita. it would have been better for me; for then i should have had
something to take refuge in. now i am utterly at sea.

allmers. [observing her closely.] if you had the choice now--. if you
could follow eyolf to where he is--?

rita. yes? what then?

allmers. if you were fully assured that you would find him again--know
him--understand him--?

rita. yes, yes; what then?

allmers. would you, of your own free will, take the leap over to him?
of your own free will leave everything behind you? renounce your whole
earthly life? would you, rita?

rita. [softly.] now, at once?

allmers. yes; to-day. this very hour. answer me--would you?

rita. [hesitating.] oh, i don't know, alfred. no! i think i should have
to stay here with you, a little while.

allmers. for my sake?

rita. yes. only for your sake.

allmers. and afterwards? would you then--? answer!

rita. oh, what can i answer? i could not go away from you. never! never!

allmers. but suppose now _i_ went to eyolf? and you had the fullest
assurance that you would meet both him and me there. then would you come
over to us?

rita. i should want to--so much! so much! but--

allmers. well? i i?

rita. [moaning softly.] i could not--i feel it. no, no, i never could!
not for all the glory of heaven!

allmers. nor i.

rita. no, you feel it so, too, don't you, alfred! you could not either,
could you?

allmers. no. for it is here, in the life of earth, that we living beings
are at home.

rita. yes, here lies the kind of happiness that we can understand.

allmers. [darkly.] oh, happiness--happiness--

rita. you mean that happiness--that we can never find it again? [looks
inquiringly at him.] but if--? [vehemently.] no, no; i dare not say it!
nor even think it!

allmers. yes, say it--say it, rita.

rita. [hesitatingly.] could we not try to--? would it not be possible to
forget him?

allmers. forget eyolf?

rita. forget the anguish and remorse, i mean.

allmers. can you wish it?

rita. yes,--if it were possible. [with an outburst.] for this--i cannot
bear this for ever! oh, can we not think of something that will bring
its forgetfulness!

allmers. [shakes his head.] what could that be?

rita. could we not see what travelling would do--far away from here?

allmers. from home? when you know you are never really well anywhere but
here.

rita. well, then, let us have crowds of people about us! keep open
house! plunge into something that can deaden and dull our thoughts!

allmers. such it life would be impossible for me.--no,--rather than
that, i would try to take up my work again.

rita. [bitingly.] your work--the work that has always stood like a dead
wall between us!

allmers. [slowly, looking fixedly at her.] there must always be a dead
wall between us two, from this time forth.

rita. why must there--?

allmers. who knows but that a child's great, open eyes are watching us
day and night.

rita. [softly, shuddering.] alfred--how terrible to think of!

allmers. our love has been like a consuming fire. now it must be
quenched--

rita. [with a movement towards him.] quenched!

allmers. [hardly.] it is quenched--in one of us.

rita. [as if petrified.] and you dare say that to me!

allmers. [more gently.] it is dead, rita. but in what i now feel for
you--in our common guilt and need of atonement--i seem to foresee a sort
of resurrection--

rita. [vehemently.] i don't care a bit about any resurrection!

allmers. rita!

rita. i am a warm-blooded being! i don't go drowsing about--with fishes'
blood in my veins. [wringing her hands.] and now to be imprisoned for
life--in anguish and remorse! imprisoned with one who is no longer mine,
mine, mine!

allmers. it must have ended so, sometime, rita.

rita. must have ended so! the love that in the beginning rushed forth so
eagerly to meet with love!

allmers. my love did not rush forth to you in the beginning.

rita. what did you feel for me, first of all?

allmers. dread.

rita. that i can understand. how was it, then, that i won you after all?

allmers. [in a low voice.] you were so entrancingly beautiful, rita.

rita. [looks searchingly at him.] then that was the only reason? say it,
alfred! the only reason?

allmers. [conquering himself.] no, there was another as well.

rita. [with an outburst.] i can guess what that was! it was "my gold,
and my green forests," as you call it. was it not so, alfred?

allmers. yes.

rita. [looks at him with deep reproach.] how could you--how could you!

allmers. i had asta to think of.

rita. [angrily.] yes, asta! [bitterly.] then it was really asta that
brought us two together?

allmers. she knew nothing about it. she has no suspicion of it, even to
this day.

rita. [rejecting the plea.] it was asta, nevertheless! [smiling, with a
sidelong glance of scorn. ] or, no--it was little eyolf. little eyolf,
my dear!

allmers. eyolf--?

rita. yes, you used to call her eyolf, did you not? i seem to remember
your telling me so--once, in a moment of confidence. [coming up to him.]
do you remember it--that entrancingly beautiful hour, alfred?

allmers. [recoiling, as if in horror.] i remember nothing! i will not
remember!

rita. [following him.] it was in that hour--when your other little eyolf
was crippled for life!

allmers. [in a hollow voice, supporting himself against the table.]
retribution!

rita. [menacingly.] yes, retribution!

[asta and borgheim return by way of the boat-shed. she is carrying some
water-lilies in her hand.]

rita. [with self-control.] well, asta, have you and mr. borgheim talked
things thoroughly over?

asta. oh, yes--pretty well.

[she puts down her umbrella and lays the flowers upon a chair.]

borgheim. miss allmers has been very silent during our walk.

rita. indeed, has she? well, alfred and i have talked things out
thoroughly enough--

asta. [looking eagerly at both of them.] what is this--?

rita. enough to last all our lifetime, i say. [breaking off.] come now,
let us go up to the house, all four of us. we must have company about us
in future. it will never do for alfred and me to be alone.

allmers. yes, do you go ahead, you two. [turning.] i must speak a word
to you before we go, asta.

rita. [looking at him.] indeed? well then, you come with me, mr.
borgheim.

[rita and borgheim go up the wood-path.]

asta. [anxiously.] alfred, what is the matter?

allmers. [darkly.] only that i cannot endure to be here any more.

asta. here! with rita, do you mean?

allmers. yes. rita and i cannot go on living together.

asta. [seizes his arm and shakes it.] oh, alfred--don't say anything so
terrible!

allmers. it is the truth. i am telling you. we are making each other
wicked and hateful.

asta. [with painful emotion.] i had never--never dreamt of anything like
this!

allmers. i did not realise it either, till to-day.

asta. and now you want to--! what is it you really want, alfred?

allmers. i want to get away from everything here--far, far away from it
all.

asta. and to stand quite alone in the world?

allmers. [nods.] as i used to, before, yes.

asta. but you are not fitted for living alone!

allmers. oh, yes. i was so in the old days, at any rate.

asta. in the old days, yes; for then you had me with you.

allmers. [trying to take her hand.] yes. and it is to you, asta, that i
now want to come home again.

asta. [eluding him.] to me! no, no, alfred! that is quite impossible.

allmers. [looks sadly at her.] then borgheim stands in the way after
all?

asta. [earnestly.] no, no; he does not! that is quite a mistake!

allmers. good. then i will come to you--my dear, dear sister. i must
come to you again--home to you, to be purified and ennobled after my
life with--

asta. [shocked.] alfred,--you are doing rita a great wrong!

allmers. i have done her a great wrong. but not in this. oh, think of
it, asta--think of our life together, yours and mine. was it not like
one long holy-day from first to last?

asta. yes, it was, alfred. but we can never live it over again.

allmers. [bitterly.] do you mean that marriage has so irreparably ruined
me?

asta. [quietly.] no, that is not what i mean.

allmers. well, then we two will live our old life over again.

asta. [with decision.] we cannot, alfred.

allmers. yes, we can. for the love of a brother and sister--

asta. [eagerly.] what of it?

allmers. that is the only relation in life that is not subject to the
law of change.

asta. [softly and tremblingly.] but if that relation were not--

allmers. not--?

asta.--not our relation?

allmers. [stares at her in astonishment.] not ours? why, what can you
mean by that?

asta. it is best i should tell you at once, alfred.

allmers. yes, yes; tell me!

asta. the letters to mother--. those in my portfolio--

allmers. well?

asta. you must read them--when i am gone.

allmers. why must i?

asta. [struggling with herself.] for then you will see that--

allmers. well?

asta.--that i have no right to bear your father's name.

allmers. [staggering backwards.] asta! what is this you say!

asta. read the letters. then you will see--and understand. and perhaps
have some forgiveness--for mother, too.

allmers. [clutching at his forehead.] i cannot grasp this--i cannot
realise the thought. you, asta--you are not--

asta. you are not my brother, alfred.

allmers. [quickly, half defiantly, looking at her.] well, but what
difference does that really make in our relation? practically none at
all.

asta. [shaking her head.] it makes all the difference, alfred. our
relation is not that of brother and sister.

allmers. no, no. but it is none the less sacred for that--it will always
be equally sacred.

asta. do not forget--that it is subject to the law of change, as you
said just now.

allmers. [looks inquiringly at her.] do you mean that--

asta. [quietly, but with rearm emotion.] not a word more--my dear,
dear alfred. [takes up the flowers from the chair.] do you see these
water-lilies?

allmers. [nodding slowly.] they are the sort that shoot up--from the
very depth.

asta. i pulled them in the tarn--where it flows out into the fiord.
[holds them out to him.] will you take them, alfred?

allmers. [taking them.] thanks.

asta. [with tears in her eyes.] they are a last greeting to you,
from--from little eyolf.

allmers. [looking at her.] from eyolf out yonder? or from you?

asta. [softly.] from both of us. [taking up her umbrella.] now come with
me to rita.

[she goes up the wood-path.]

allmers. [takes up his hat from the table, and whispers sadly.] asta.
eyolf. little eyolf--!

[he follows her up the path.]




act third

[an elevation, overgrown with shrubs, in allmers's garden. at the back
a sheer cliff, with a railing along its edge, and with steps on the left
leading downwards. an extensive view over the fiord, which lies deep
below. a flagstaff with lines, but no flag, stands by the railing. in
front, on the right, a summer-house, covered with creepers and wild
vines. outside it, a bench. it is a late summer evening, with clear sky.
deepening twilight.]

[asta is sitting on the bench, with her hands in her lap. she is wearing
her outdoor dress and a hat, has her parasol at her side, and a little
travelling-bag on a strap over her shoulder.]

[borgheim comes up from the back on the left. he, too, has a
travelling-bag over his shoulder. he is carrying a rolled-up flag.]

borgheim. [catching sight of asta.] oh, so you are up here!

asta. yes, i am taking my last look out over the fiord.

borgheim. then i am glad i happened to come up.

asta. have you been searching for me?

borgheim. yes, i have. i wanted to say good-bye to you for the present.
not for good and all, i hope.

asta. [with a faint smile.] you are persevering.

borgheim. a road-maker has got to be.

asta. have you seen anything of alfred? or of rita?

borgheim. yes, i saw them both.

asta. together?

borgheim. no--apart.

asta. what are you going to do with that flag?

borgheim. mrs. allmers asked me to come up and hoist it.

asta. hoist a flag just now?

borgheim. half-mast high. she wants it to fly both night and day, she
says.

asta. [sighing.] poor rita! and poor alfred!

borgheim. [busied with the flag.] have you the heart to leave them? i
ask, because i see you are in travelling-dress.

asta. [in a low voice.] i must go.

borgheim. well, if you must, then--

asta. and you are going, too, to-night?

borgheim. i must, too. i am going by the train. are you going that way?

asta. no. i shall take the steamer.

borgheim. [glancing at her.] we each take our own way, then?

asta. yes.

[she sits and looks on while he hoists the flag half-mast high. when he
has done he goes up to her.]

borgheim. miss asta--you can't think how grieved i am about little
eyolf.

asta. [looks up at him.] yes, i am sure you feel it deeply.

borgheim. and the feeling tortures me. for the fact is, grief is not
much in my way.

asta. [raising her eyes to the flag.] it will pass over in time--all of
it. all our sorrow.

borgheim. all? do you believe that?

asta. like a squall at sea. when once you have got far away from here,
then--

borgheim. it will have to be very far away indeed.

asta. and then you have this great new road-work, too.

borgheim. but no one to help me in it.

asta. oh yes, surely you have.

borgheim. [shaking his head.] no one. no one to share the gladness with.
for it is gladness that most needs sharing.

asta. not the labour and trouble?

borgheim. pooh--that sort of thing one can always get through alone.

asta. but the gladness--that must be shared with some one, you think?

borgheim. yes; for if not, where would be the pleasure in being glad?

asta. ah yes--perhaps there is something in that.

borgheim. oh, of course, for a certain time you can go on feeling glad
in your own heart. but it won't do in the long run. no, it takes two to
be glad.

asta. always two? never more? never many?

borgheim. well, you see--then it becomes a quite different matter. miss
asta--are you sure you can never make up your mind to share gladness and
success and--and labour and trouble, with one--with one alone in all the
world?

asta. i have tried it--once.

borgheim. have you?

asta. yes, all the time that my brother--that alfred and i lived
together.

borgheim. oh, with your brother, yes. but that is altogether different.
that ought rather to be called peace than happiness, i should say.

asta. it was delightful, all the same.

borgheim. there now--you see even that seemed to you delightful. but
just think now--if he had not been your brother!

asta. [makes a movement to rise, but remains sitting.] then we should
never have been together. for i was a child then--and he wasn't much
more.

borgheim. [after a pause.] was it so delightful--that time?

asta. oh yes, indeed it was.

borgheim. was there much that was really bright and happy in your life
then?

asta. oh yes, so much. you cannot think how much.

borgheim. tell me a little about it, miss asta.

asta. oh, there are only trifles to tell.

borgheim. such as--? well?

asta. such as the time when alfred had passed his examination--and had
distinguished himself. and then, from time, to time, when he got a post
in some school or other. or when he would sit at home working at an
article--and would read it aloud to me. and then when it would appear in
some magazine.

borgheim. yes, i can quite see that it must have been a peaceful,
delightful life--a brother and sister sharing all their joys. [shaking
his head.] what i cannot understand is that your brother could ever give
you up, asta.

asta. [with suppressed emotion.] alfred married, you know.

borgheim. was not that very hard for you?

asta. yes, at first. it seemed as though i had utterly lost him all at
once.

borgheim. well, luckily it was not so bad as that.

asta. no.

borgheim. but, all the same--how could he! go and marry, i mean--when he
could have kept you with him, alone!

asta. [looking straight in front of her.] he was subject to the law of
change, i suppose.

borgheim. the law of change?

asta. so alfred calls it.

borgheim. pooh--what a stupid law that must be! i don't believe a bit in
that law.

asta. [rising.] you may come to believe in it, in time.

borgheim. never in all my life! [insistently.] but listen now, miss
asta! do be reasonable for once in a way--in this matter, i mean--

asta. [interrupting him.] oh, no, no--don't let us begin upon that
again!

borgheim. [continuing as before.] yes, asta--i can't possibly give you
up so easily. now your brother has everything as he wishes it. he can
live his life quite contentedly without you. he doesn't require you at
all. then this--this--that at one blow has changed your whole position
here--

asta. [with a start.] what do you mean by that?

borgheim. the loss of the child. what else should i mean?

asta. [recovering her self-control.] little eyolf is gone, yes.

borgheim. and what more does that leave you to do here? you have not the
poor little boy to take care of now. you have no duties--no claims upon
you of any sort.

asta. oh, please, mr. borgheim--don't make it so hard for me.

borgheim. i must; i should be mad if i did not try my uttermost. i
shall be leaving town before very long, rind perhaps i shall have no
opportunity of meeting you there. perhaps i shall not see you again for
a long, long time. and who knows what may happen in the meanwhile?

asta. [with a grave smile.] so you are afraid of the law of change,
after all?

borgheim. no, not in the least. [laughing bitterly.] and there is
nothing to be changed, either--not in you. i mean. for i can see you
don't care much about me.

asta. you know very well that i do.

borgheim. perhaps, but not nearly enough. not as i want you to. [more
forcibly.] by heaven, asta--miss asta--i cannot tell you how strongly i
feel that you are wrong in this! a little onward, perhaps, from to-day
and to-morrow, all life's happiness may be awaiting us. and we must
needs pass it by! do you think we will not come to repent of it, asta?

asta. [quietly.] i don't know. i only know that they are not for us--all
these bright possibilities.

borgheim. [looks at her with self-control.] then i must make my roads
alone?

asta. [warmly.] oh, how i wish i could stand by you in it all! help you
in the labour--share the gladness with you--

borgheim. would you--if you could?

asta. yes, that i would.

borgheim. but you cannot?

asta. [looking down.] would you be content to have only half of me?

borgheim. no. you must be utterly and entirely mine.

asta. [looks at him, and says quietly.] then i cannot.

borgheim. good-bye then, miss asta.

[he is on the point of going. allmers comes up from the left at the
back. borgheim stops.]

allmers. [the moment he has reached the top of the steps, points, and
says in a low voice.] is rita in there--in the summer-house?

borgheim. no; there is no one here but miss asta.

[allmers comes forward.]

asta. [going towards him.] shall i go down and look for her? shall i get
her to come up here?

allmers. [with a negative gesture.] no, no, no--let it alone. [to
borgheim.] is it you that have hoisted the flag?

borgheim. yes. mrs. allmers asked me to. that was what brought me up
here.

allmers. and you are going to start to-night?

borgheim. yes. to-night i go away in good earnest.

allmers. [with a glance at asta.] and you have made sure of pleasant
company, i daresay.

borgheim. [shaking his head.] i am going alone.

allmers. [with surprise.] alone!

borgheim. utterly alone.

allmers. [absently.] indeed?

borgheim. and i shall have to remain alone, too.

allmers. there is something horrible in being alone. the thought of it
runs like ice through my blood--

asta. oh, but, alfred, you are not alone.

allmers. there may be something horrible in that too, asta.

asta. [oppressed.] oh, don't talk like that! don't think like that!

allmers. [not listening to her.] but since you are not going with him--?
since there is nothing to bind you--? why will you not remain out here
with me--and with rita?

asta. [uneasily.] no, no, i cannot. i must go back to town now.

allmers. but only in to town, asta. do you hear!

asta. yes.

allmers. and you must promise me that you will soon come out again.

asta. [quickly.] no, no, i dare not promise you that, for the present.

allmers. well as you will. we shall soon meet in town, then.

asta. [imploringly.] but, alfred, you must stay at home here with rita
now.

allmers. [without answering, turns to borgheim.] you may find it a good
thing, after all, that you have to take your journey alone.

borgheim. [annoyed.] oh, how can you say such a thing?

allmers. you see, you can never tell whom you might happen to meet
afterwards--on the way.

asta. [involuntarily.] alfred!

allmers. the right fellow-traveller--when it is too late--too late.

asta. [softly, quivering.] alfred! alfred!

borgheim. [looking front one to the other.] what is the meaning of this?
i don't understand--

[rita comes up from the left at the back.]

rita. [plaintively.] oh, don't go away from me, all of you!

asta. [going towards her.] you said you preferred to be alone.

rita. yes, but i dare not. it is getting so horribly dark. i seem to see
great, open eyes fixed upon me!

asta. [tenderly and sympathetically.] what if it were so, rita? you
ought not to be afraid of those eyes.

rita. how can you say so! not afraid!

allmers. [insistently.] asta, i beg you--for heaven's sake--remain here
with rita!

rita. yes! and with alfred, too. do! do, asta!

asta. [struggling with herself.] oh, i want to so much--

rita. well, then, do it! for alfred and i cannot go alone through the
sorrow and heartache.

allmers. [darkly.] say, rather--through the ranklings of remorse.

rita. oh, whatever you like to call it--we cannot bear it alone, we two.
oh, asta, i beg and implore you! stay here and help us! take eyolf's
place for us--

asta. [shrinking.] eyolf's--

rita. yes, would you not have it so, alfred?

allmers. if she can and will.

rita. you used to call her your little eyolf. [seizes her hand.]
henceforth you shall be our eyolf, asta! eyolf, as you were before.

allmers. [with concealed emotion.] remain--and share our life with us,
asta. with rita. with me. with me--your brother!

asta. [with decision, snatches her hand away.] no. i cannot. [turning.]
mr. borgheim--what time does the steamer start?

borgheim. now--at once.

asta. then i must go on board. will you go with me?

borgheim. [with a suppressed outburst of joy.] will i? yes, yes!

asta. then come!

rita. [slowly.] ah! that is how it is. well, then, you cannot stay with
us.

asta. [throwing her arms round her neck.] thanks for everything, rita!
(goes up to allmers and grasps his hand.) alfred-good-bye! a thousand
times, good-bye!

allmers. [softly and eagerly.] what is this, asta? it seems as though you
were taking flight.

asta. [in subdued anguish.] yes, alfred--i am taking flight.

allmers. flight--from me!

asta. [whispering.] from you--and from myself.

allmers. [shrinking back.] ah--!

[asta rushes down the steps at the back. borgheim waves his hat and
follows her. rita leans against the entrance to the summer-house.
allmers goes, in strong inward emotion, up to the railing, and stands
there gazing downwards. a pause.]

allmers. [turns, and says with hard-won composure.] there comes the
steamer. look, rita.

rita. i dare not look at it.

allmers. you dare not?

rita. no. for it has a red eye--and a green one, too. great, glowing
eyes.

allmers. oh, those are only the lights, you know.

rita. henceforth they are eyes--for me. they stare and stare out of the
darkness--and into the darkness.

allmers. now she is putting in to shore.

rita. where are they mooring her this evening, then?

allmers. [coming forward.] at the pier, as usual--

rita. [drawing herself up.] how can they moor her there!

allmers. they must.

rita. but it was there that eyolf--! how can they moor her there!

allmers. yes, life is pitiless, rita.

rita. men are heartless. they take no thought--whether for the living or
for the dead.

allmers. there you are right. life goes its own way--just as if nothing
in the world had happened.

rita. [gazing straight before her.] and nothing has happened, either.
not to others. only to us two.

allmers. [the pain re-awakening.] yes, rita--so it was to no purpose
that you bore him in sorrow and anguish. for now he is gone again--and
has left no trace behind him.

rita. only the crutch was saved.

allmers. [angrily.] be silent! do not let me hear that word!

rita. [plaintively.] oh, i cannot bear the thought that he is gone from
us.

allmers. [coldly and bitterly.] you could very well do without him while
he was with us. half the day would often pass without your setting eyes
on him.

rita. yes, for i knew that i could see him whenever i wanted to.

allmers. yes, that is how we have gone and squandered the short time we
had with little eyolf.

rita. [listening, in dread.] do you hear, alfred! now it is ringing
again!

allmers. [looking over the fiord.] it is the steamer's bell that is
ringing. she is just starting.

rita. oh, it's not that bell i mean. all day i have heard it ringing in
my ears.--now it is ringing again!

allmers. [going up to her.] you are mistaken, rita.

rita. no, i hear it so plainly. it sounds like a knell. slow. slow. and
always the same words.

allmers. words? what words?

rita. [nodding her head in the rhythm.] "the crútch is--flóating. the
crútch is--flóating." oh, surely you must hear it, too!

allmers. [shaking his head.] i hear nothing. and there is nothing to
hear.

rita. oh, you may say what you will--i hear it so plainly.

allmers. [looking out over the railing.] now they are on board, rita.
now the steamer is on her way to the town.

rita. is it possible you do not hear it? "the crútch is--flóating. the
crútch is ------"

allmers. [coming forward.] you shall not stand there listening to a
sound that does not exist. i tell you, asta and borgheim are on board.
they have started already. asta is gone.

rita. [looks timidly at him.] then i suppose you will soon be gone, too,
alfred?

allmers. [quickly.] what do you mean by that?

rita. that you will follow your sister.

allmers. has asta told you anything?

rita. no. but you said yourself it was for asta's sake that--that we
came together.

allmers. yes, but you, you yourself, have bound me to you--by our life
together.

rita. oh, in your eyes i am not--i am not--entrancingly beautiful any
more.

allmers. the law of change may perhaps keep us together, none the less.

rita. [nodding slowly.] there is a change in me now--i feel the anguish
of it.

allmers. anguish?

rita. yes, for change, too, is a sort of birth.

allmers. it is--or a resurrection. transition to a higher life.

rita. [gazing sadly before her.] yes--with the loss of all, all life's
happiness.

allmers. that loss is just the gain.

rita. [vehemently.] oh, phrases! good god, we are creatures of earth
after all.

allmers. but something akin to the sea and the heavens too, rita.

rita. you perhaps. not i.

allmers. oh, yes--you too, more than you yourself suspect.

rita. [advancing a pace towards him.] tell me, alfred--could you think
of taking up your work again?

allmers. the work that you have hated so?

rita. i am easier to please now. i am willing to share you with the
book.

allmers. why?

rita. only to keep you here with me--to have you near me.

allmers. oh, it is so little i can do to help you, rita.

rita. but perhaps i could help you.

allmers. with my book, do you mean?

rita. no; but to live your life.

allmers. [shaking his head.] i seem to have no life to live.

rita. well then, to endure your life.

allmers. [darkly, looking away from her.] i think it would be best for
both of us that we should part.

rita. [looking curiously at him.] then where would you go? perhaps to
asta, after all?

allmers. no--never again to asta.

rita. where then?

allmers. up into the solitudes.

rita. up among the mountains? is that what you mean?

allmers. yes.

rita. but all that is mere dreaming, alfred! you could not live up
there.

allmers. and yet i feel myself drawn to them.

rita. why? tell me!

allmers. sit down--and i will tell you something.

rita. something that happened to you up there?

allmers. yes.

rita. and that you never told asta and me?

allmers. yes.

rita. oh, you are so silent about everything. you ought not to be.

allmers. sit down there--and i will tell you about it.

rita. yes, yes--tell me!

[she sits on the bench beside the summer-house.]

allmers. i was alone up there, in the heart of the great mountains. i
came to a wide, dreary mountain lake; and that lake i had to cross. but
i could not--for there was neither a boat nor any one there.

rita. well? and then?

allmers. then i went without any guidance into a side valley. i thought
that by that way i could push on over the heights and between the
peaks--and then down again on the other side of the lake.

rita. oh, and you lost yourself, alfred!

allmers. yes; i mistook the direction--for there was no path or track.
and all day i went on--and all the next night. and at last i thought i
should never see the face of man again.

rita. not come home to us? oh, then, i am sure your thoughts were with
us here.

allmers. no--they were not.

rita. not?

allmers. no. it was so strange. both you and eyolf seemed to have
drifted far, far away from me--and asta, too.

rita. then what did you think of?

allmers. i did not think. i dragged myself along among the
precipices--and revelled in the peace and luxury of death.

rita. [springing up.] oh, don't speak in that way of that horror!

allmers. i did not feel it so. i had no fear. here went death and i,
it seemed to me, like two good fellow-travellers. it all seemed so
natural--so simple, i thought. in my family, we don't live to be old--

rita. oh, don't say such things, alfred! you see you came safely out of
it, after all.

allmers. yes; all of a sudden, i found myself where i wanted to be--on
the other side of the lake.

rita. it must have been a night of terror for you, alfred. but now that
it is over, you will not admit it to yourself.

allmers. that night sealed my resolution. and it was then that i turned
about and came straight homewards. to eyolf.

rita. [softly.] too late.

allmers. yes. and then when--my fellow-traveller came and took him--then
i felt the horror of it; of it all; of all that, in spite of everything,
we dare not tear ourselves away from. so earthbound are we, both of us,
rita.

rita. [with a gleam of joy.] yes, you are, too, are you not! [coming
close to him.] oh, let us live our life together as long as we can!

allmers. [shrugging his shoulders.] live our life, yes! and have nothing
to fill life with. an empty void on all sides--wherever i look.

rita. [in fear.] oh, sooner or later you will go away from me, alfred! i
feel it! i can see it in your face! you will go away from me.

allmers. with my fellow-traveller, do you mean?

rita. no, i mean worse than that. of your own free will--you will leave
me--for you think it's only here, with me, that you have nothing to live
for. is not that what is in your thoughts?

allmers. [looking steadfastly at her.] what if it were--?

[a disturbance, and the noise of angry, quarrelling voices is heard from
down below, in the distance. allmers goes to the railing.]

rita. what is that? [with an outburst.] oh, you'll see, they have found
him!

allmers. he will never be found.

rita. but what is it then?

allmers. [coming forward.] only fighting--as usual.

rita. down on the beach?

allmers. yes. the whole village down there ought to be swept away. now
the men have come home--drunk, as they always are. they are beating the
children--do you hear the boys crying! the women are shrieking for help
for them--

rita. should we not get some one to go down and help them?

allmers. [harshly and angrily.] help them, who did not help eyolf! let
them go--as they let eyolf go.

rita. oh, you must not talk like that, alfred! nor think like that!

allmers. i cannot think otherwise. all the old hovels ought to be torn
down.

rita. and then what is to become of all the poor people?

allmers. they must go somewhere else.

rita. and the children, too?

allmers. does it make much difference where they go to the dogs?

rita. [quietly and reproachfully.] you are forcing yourself into this
harshness, alfred.

allmers. [vehemently.] i have a right to be harsh now! it is my duty.

rita. your duty?

allmers. my duty to eyolf. he must not lie unavenged. once for all,
rita--it is as i tell you! think it over! have the whole place down
there razed to the ground--when i am gone.

rita. [looks intently at him.] when you are gone?

allmers. yes. for that will at least give you something to fill your
life with--and something you must have.

rita. [firmly and decidedly.] there you are right---i must. but can you
guess what i will set about--when you are gone?

allmers. well, what?

rita. [slowly and with resolution.] as soon as you are gone from me,
i will go down to the beach, and bring all the poor neglected children
home with me. all the mischievous boys--

allmers. what will you do with them here?

rita. i will take them to my heart.

allmers. you!

rita. yes, i will. from the day you leave me, they shall all be here,
all of them, as if they were mine.

allmers. [shocked.] in our little eyolf's place!

rita. yes, in our little eyolf's place. they shall live in eyolf's
rooms. they shall read his books. they shall play with his toys. they
shall take it in turns to sit in his chair at table.

allmers. but this is sheer madness in you! i do not know a creature in
the world that is less fitted than you for anything of that sort.

rita. then i shall have to educate myself for it; to train myself; to
discipline myself.

allmers. if you are really in earnest about this--about all you
say--then there must indeed be a change in you.

rita. yes, there is, alfred--and for that i have you to thank. you
have made an empty place within me; and i must try to fill it up with
something--with something that is a little like love.

allmers. [stands for a moment lost in thought; then looks at her.] the
truth is, we have not done much for the poor people down there.

rita. we have done nothing for them.

allmers. scarcely even thought of them.

rita. never thought of them in sympathy.

allmers. we, who had "the gold, and the green forests"--

rita. our hands were closed to them. and our hearts too.

allmers. [nods.] then it was perhaps natural enough, after all, that
they should not risk their lives to save little eyolf.

rita. [softly.] think, alfred! are you so certain that--that we would
have risked ours?

allmers. [with an uneasy gesture of repulsion.] you must never doubt
that.

rita. oh, we are children of earth.

allmers. what do you really think you can do with all these neglected
children?

rita. i suppose i must try if i cannot lighten and--and ennoble their
lot in life.

allmers. if you can do that--then eyolf was not born in vain.

rita. nor taken from us in vain, either.

allmers. [looking steadfastly at her.] be quite clear about one thing,
rita--it is not love that is driving you to this.

rita. no, it is not--at any rate, not yet.

allmers. well, then what is it?

rita. [half-evasively.] you have so often talked to asta of human
responsibility--

allmers. of the book that you hated.

rita. i hate that book still. but i used to sit and listen to what you
told her. and now i will try to continue it--in my own way.

allmers. [shaking his head.] it is not for the sake of that unfinished
book--

rita. no, i have another reason as well.

allmers. what is that?

rita. [softly, with a melancholy smile.] i want to make my peace with
the great, open eyes, you see.

allmers. [struck, fixing his eyes upon her.] perhaps, i could join you
in that? and help you, rita?

rita. would you?

allmers. yes--if i were only sure i could.

rita. [hesitatingly.] but then you would have to remain here.

allmers. [softly.] let us try if it could not be so.

rita. [almost inaudibly.] yes, let us, alfred.

[both are silent. then allmers goes up to the flagstaff and hoists the
flag to the top. rita stands beside the summer-house and looks at him in
silence.]

allmers. [coming forward again.] we have a heavy day of work before us,
rita.

rita. you will see--that now and then a sabbath peace will descend on
us.

allmers. [quietly, with emotion.] then, perhaps, we shall know that the
spirits are with us.

rita. [whispering.] the spirits?

allmers. [as before.] yes, they will perhaps be around us--those whom we
have lost.

rita. [nods slowly.] our little eyolf. and your big eyolf, too.

allmers. [gazing straight before him.] now and then, perhaps, we may
still--on the way through life--have a little, passing glimpse of them.

rita. when, shall we look for them, alfred?

allmers. [fixing his eyes upon her.] upwards.

rita. [nods in approval.] yes, yes--upwards.

allmers. upwards--towards the peaks. towards the stars. and towards the
great silence.

rita. [giving him her hand.] thanks!
