contents

                                       page
lord arthur savile’s crime                3
the canterville ghost                    65
the sphinx without a secret             121
the model millionaire                   133
the portrait of mr. w. h.               145




lord arthur savile’s crime
a study of duty


chapter i


it was lady windermere’s last reception before easter, and bentinck house
was even more crowded than usual.  six cabinet ministers had come on from
the speaker’s levée in their stars and ribands, all the pretty women wore
their smartest dresses, and at the end of the picture-gallery stood the
princess sophia of carlsrühe, a heavy tartar-looking lady, with tiny
black eyes and wonderful emeralds, talking bad french at the top of her
voice, and laughing immoderately at everything that was said to her.  it
was certainly a wonderful medley of people.  gorgeous peeresses chatted
affably to violent radicals, popular preachers brushed coat-tails with
eminent sceptics, a perfect bevy of bishops kept following a stout
prima-donna from room to room, on the staircase stood several royal
academicians, disguised as artists, and it was said that at one time the
supper-room was absolutely crammed with geniuses.  in fact, it was one of
lady windermere’s best nights, and the princess stayed till nearly
half-past eleven.

as soon as she had gone, lady windermere returned to the picture-gallery,
where a celebrated political economist was solemnly explaining the
scientific theory of music to an indignant virtuoso from hungary, and
began to talk to the duchess of paisley.  she looked wonderfully
beautiful with her grand ivory throat, her large blue forget-me-not eyes,
and her heavy coils of golden hair.  _or pur_ they were—not that pale
straw colour that nowadays usurps the gracious name of gold, but such
gold as is woven into sunbeams or hidden in strange amber; and they gave
to her face something of the frame of a saint, with not a little of the
fascination of a sinner.  she was a curious psychological study.  early
in life she had discovered the important truth that nothing looks so like
innocence as an indiscretion; and by a series of reckless escapades, half
of them quite harmless, she had acquired all the privileges of a
personality.  she had more than once changed her husband; indeed, debrett
credits her with three marriages; but as she had never changed her lover,
the world had long ago ceased to talk scandal about her.  she was now
forty years of age, childless, and with that inordinate passion for
pleasure which is the secret of remaining young.

suddenly she looked eagerly round the room, and said, in her clear
contralto voice, ‘where is my cheiromantist?’

‘your what, gladys?’ exclaimed the duchess, giving an involuntary start.

‘my cheiromantist, duchess; i can’t live without him at present.’

‘dear gladys! you are always so original,’ murmured the duchess, trying
to remember what a cheiromantist really was, and hoping it was not the
same as a cheiropodist.

‘he comes to see my hand twice a week regularly,’ continued lady
windermere, ‘and is most interesting about it.’

‘good heavens!’ said the duchess to herself, ‘he is a sort of
cheiropodist after all.  how very dreadful.  i hope he is a foreigner at
any rate.  it wouldn’t be quite so bad then.’

‘i must certainly introduce him to you.’

‘introduce him!’ cried the duchess; ‘you don’t mean to say he is here?’
and she began looking about for a small tortoise-shell fan and a very
tattered lace shawl, so as to be ready to go at a moment’s notice.

‘of course he is here; i would not dream of giving a party without him.
he tells me i have a pure psychic hand, and that if my thumb had been the
least little bit shorter, i should have been a confirmed pessimist, and
gone into a convent.’

‘oh, i see!’ said the duchess, feeling very much relieved; ‘he tells
fortunes, i suppose?’

‘and misfortunes, too,’ answered lady windermere, ‘any amount of them.
next year, for instance, i am in great danger, both by land and sea, so i
am going to live in a balloon, and draw up my dinner in a basket every
evening.  it is all written down on my little finger, or on the palm of
my hand, i forget which.’

‘but surely that is tempting providence, gladys.’

‘my dear duchess, surely providence can resist temptation by this time.
i think every one should have their hands told once a month, so as to
know what not to do.  of course, one does it all the same, but it is so
pleasant to be warned.  now if some one doesn’t go and fetch mr. podgers
at once, i shall have to go myself.’

‘let me go, lady windermere,’ said a tall handsome young man, who was
standing by, listening to the conversation with an amused smile.

‘thanks so much, lord arthur; but i am afraid you wouldn’t recognise
him.’

‘if he is as wonderful as you say, lady windermere, i couldn’t well miss
him.  tell me what he is like, and i’ll bring him to you at once.’

‘well, he is not a bit like a cheiromantist.  i mean he is not
mysterious, or esoteric, or romantic-looking.  he is a little, stout man,
with a funny, bald head, and great gold-rimmed spectacles; something
between a family doctor and a country attorney.  i’m really very sorry,
but it is not my fault.  people are so annoying.  all my pianists look
exactly like poets, and all my poets look exactly like pianists; and i
remember last season asking a most dreadful conspirator to dinner, a man
who had blown up ever so many people, and always wore a coat of mail, and
carried a dagger up his shirt-sleeve; and do you know that when he came
he looked just like a nice old clergyman, and cracked jokes all the
evening?  of course, he was very amusing, and all that, but i was awfully
disappointed; and when i asked him about the coat of mail, he only
laughed, and said it was far too cold to wear in england.  ah, here is
mr. podgers!  now, mr. podgers, i want you to tell the duchess of
paisley’s hand.  duchess, you must take your glove off.  no, not the left
hand, the other.’

‘dear gladys, i really don’t think it is quite right,’ said the duchess,
feebly unbuttoning a rather soiled kid glove.

‘nothing interesting ever is,’ said lady windermere: ‘_on a fait le monde
ainsi_.  but i must introduce you.  duchess, this is mr. podgers, my pet
cheiromantist.  mr. podgers, this is the duchess of paisley, and if you
say that she has a larger mountain of the moon than i have, i will never
believe in you again.’

‘i am sure, gladys, there is nothing of the kind in my hand,’ said the
duchess gravely.

‘your grace is quite right,’ said mr. podgers, glancing at the little fat
hand with its short square fingers, ‘the mountain of the moon is not
developed.  the line of life, however, is excellent.  kindly bend the
wrist.  thank you.  three distinct lines on the _rascette_!  you will
live to a great age, duchess, and be extremely happy.  ambition—very
moderate, line of intellect not exaggerated, line of heart—’

‘now, do be indiscreet, mr. podgers,’ cried lady windermere.

‘nothing would give me greater pleasure,’ said mr. podgers, bowing, ‘if
the duchess ever had been, but i am sorry to say that i see great
permanence of affection, combined with a strong sense of duty.’

‘pray go on, mr. podgers,’ said the duchess, looking quite pleased.

‘economy is not the least of your grace’s virtues,’ continued mr.
podgers, and lady windermere went off into fits of laughter.

‘economy is a very good thing,’ remarked the duchess complacently; ‘when
i married paisley he had eleven castles, and not a single house fit to
live in.’

‘and now he has twelve houses, and not a single castle,’ cried lady
windermere.

‘well, my dear,’ said the duchess, ‘i like—’

‘comfort,’ said mr. podgers, ‘and modern improvements, and hot water laid
on in every bedroom.  your grace is quite right.  comfort is the only
thing our civilisation can give us.

‘you have told the duchess’s character admirably, mr. podgers, and now
you must tell lady flora’s’; and in answer to a nod from the smiling
hostess, a tall girl, with sandy scotch hair, and high shoulder-blades,
stepped awkwardly from behind the sofa, and held out a long, bony hand
with spatulate fingers.

‘ah, a pianist! i see,’ said mr. podgers, ‘an excellent pianist, but
perhaps hardly a musician.  very reserved, very honest, and with a great
love of animals.’

‘quite true!’ exclaimed the duchess, turning to lady windermere,
‘absolutely true!  flora keeps two dozen collie dogs at macloskie, and
would turn our town house into a menagerie if her father would let her.’

‘well, that is just what i do with my house every thursday evening,’
cried lady windermere, laughing, ‘only i like lions better than collie
dogs.’

‘your one mistake, lady windermere,’ said mr. podgers, with a pompous
bow.

‘if a woman can’t make her mistakes charming, she is only a female,’ was
the answer.  ‘but you must read some more hands for us.  come, sir
thomas, show mr. podgers yours’; and a genial-looking old gentleman, in a
white waistcoat, came forward, and held out a thick rugged hand, with a
very long third finger.

‘an adventurous nature; four long voyages in the past, and one to come.
been ship-wrecked three times.  no, only twice, but in danger of a
shipwreck your next journey.  a strong conservative, very punctual, and
with a passion for collecting curiosities.  had a severe illness between
the ages sixteen and eighteen.  was left a fortune when about thirty.
great aversion to cats and radicals.’

‘extraordinary!’ exclaimed sir thomas; ‘you must really tell my wife’s
hand, too.’

‘your second wife’s,’ said mr. podgers quietly, still keeping sir
thomas’s hand in his.  ‘your second wife’s.  i shall be charmed’; but
lady marvel, a melancholy-looking woman, with brown hair and sentimental
eyelashes, entirely declined to have her past or her future exposed; and
nothing that lady windermere could do would induce monsieur de koloff,
the russian ambassador, even to take his gloves off.  in fact, many
people seemed afraid to face the odd little man with his stereotyped
smile, his gold spectacles, and his bright, beady eyes; and when he told
poor lady fermor, right out before every one, that she did not care a bit
for music, but was extremely fond of musicians, it was generally felt
that cheiromancy was a most dangerous science, and one that ought not to
be encouraged, except in a _tête-à-tête_.

lord arthur savile, however, who did not know anything about lady
fermor’s unfortunate story, and who had been watching mr. podgers with a
great deal of interest, was filled with an immense curiosity to have his
own hand read, and feeling somewhat shy about putting himself forward,
crossed over the room to where lady windermere was sitting, and, with a
charming blush, asked her if she thought mr. podgers would mind.

‘of course, he won’t mind,’ said lady windermere, ‘that is what he is
here for.  all my lions, lord arthur, are performing lions, and jump
through hoops whenever i ask them.  but i must warn you beforehand that i
shall tell sybil everything.  she is coming to lunch with me to-morrow,
to talk about bonnets, and if mr. podgers finds out that you have a bad
temper, or a tendency to gout, or a wife living in bayswater, i shall
certainly let her know all about it.’

lord arthur smiled, and shook his head.  ‘i am not afraid,’ he answered.
‘sybil knows me as well as i know her.’

‘ah!  i am a little sorry to hear you say that.  the proper basis for
marriage is a mutual misunderstanding.  no, i am not at all cynical, i
have merely got experience, which, however, is very much the same thing.
mr. podgers, lord arthur savile is dying to have his hand read.  don’t
tell him that he is engaged to one of the most beautiful girls in london,
because that appeared in the _morning post_ a month ago.

‘dear lady windermere,’ cried the marchioness of jedburgh, ‘do let mr.
podgers stay here a little longer.  he has just told me i should go on
the stage, and i am so interested.’

‘if he has told you that, lady jedburgh, i shall certainly take him away.
come over at once, mr. podgers, and read lord arthur’s hand.’

‘well,’ said lady jedburgh, making a little _moue_ as she rose from the
sofa, ‘if i am not to be allowed to go on the stage, i must be allowed to
be part of the audience at any rate.’

‘of course; we are all going to be part of the audience,’ said lady
windermere; ‘and now, mr. podgers, be sure and tell us something nice.
lord arthur is one of my special favourites.’

but when mr. podgers saw lord arthur’s hand he grew curiously pale, and
said nothing.  a shudder seemed to pass through him, and his great bushy
eyebrows twitched convulsively, in an odd, irritating way they had when
he was puzzled.  then some huge beads of perspiration broke out on his
yellow forehead, like a poisonous dew, and his fat fingers grew cold and
clammy.

lord arthur did not fail to notice these strange signs of agitation, and,
for the first time in his life, he himself felt fear.  his impulse was to
rush from the room, but he restrained himself.  it was better to know the
worst, whatever it was, than to be left in this hideous uncertainty.

‘i am waiting, mr. podgers,’ he said.

‘we are all waiting,’ cried lady windermere, in her quick, impatient
manner, but the cheiromantist made no reply.

‘i believe arthur is going on the stage,’ said lady jedburgh, ‘and that,
after your scolding, mr. podgers is afraid to tell him so.’

suddenly mr. podgers dropped lord arthur’s right hand, and seized hold of
his left, bending down so low to examine it that the gold rims of his
spectacles seemed almost to touch the palm.  for a moment his face became
a white mask of horror, but he soon recovered his _sang-froid_, and
looking up at lady windermere, said with a forced smile, ‘it is the hand
of a charming young man.

‘of course it is!’ answered lady windermere, ‘but will he be a charming
husband?  that is what i want to know.’

‘all charming young men are,’ said mr. podgers.

‘i don’t think a husband should be too fascinating,’ murmured lady
jedburgh pensively, ‘it is so dangerous.’

‘my dear child, they never are too fascinating,’ cried lady windermere.
‘but what i want are details.  details are the only things that interest.
what is going to happen to lord arthur?’

‘well, within the next few months lord arthur will go a voyage—’

‘oh yes, his honeymoon, of course!’

‘and lose a relative.’

‘not his sister, i hope?’ said lady jedburgh, in a piteous tone of voice.

‘certainly not his sister,’ answered mr. podgers, with a deprecating wave
of the hand, ‘a distant relative merely.’

‘well, i am dreadfully disappointed,’ said lady windermere.  ‘i have
absolutely nothing to tell sybil to-morrow.  no one cares about distant
relatives nowadays.  they went out of fashion years ago.  however, i
suppose she had better have a black silk by her; it always does for
church, you know.  and now let us go to supper.  they are sure to have
eaten everything up, but we may find some hot soup.  françois used to
make excellent soup once, but he is so agitated about politics at
present, that i never feel quite certain about him.  i do wish general
boulanger would keep quiet.  duchess, i am sure you are tired?’

‘not at all, dear gladys,’ answered the duchess, waddling towards the
door.  ‘i have enjoyed myself immensely, and the cheiropodist, i mean the
cheiromantist, is most interesting.  flora, where can my tortoise-shell
fan be?  oh, thank you, sir thomas, so much.  and my lace shawl, flora?
oh, thank you, sir thomas, very kind, i’m sure’; and the worthy creature
finally managed to get downstairs without dropping her scent-bottle more
than twice.

all this time lord arthur savile had remained standing by the fireplace,
with the same feeling of dread over him, the same sickening sense of
coming evil.  he smiled sadly at his sister, as she swept past him on
lord plymdale’s arm, looking lovely in her pink brocade and pearls, and
he hardly heard lady windermere when she called to him to follow her.  he
thought of sybil merton, and the idea that anything could come between
them made his eyes dim with tears.

looking at him, one would have said that nemesis had stolen the shield of
pallas, and shown him the gorgon’s head.  he seemed turned to stone, and
his face was like marble in its melancholy.  he had lived the delicate
and luxurious life of a young man of birth and fortune, a life exquisite
in its freedom from sordid care, its beautiful boyish insouciance; and
now for the first time he became conscious of the terrible mystery of
destiny, of the awful meaning of doom.

how mad and monstrous it all seemed!  could it be that written on his
hand, in characters that he could not read himself, but that another
could decipher, was some fearful secret of sin, some blood-red sign of
crime?  was there no escape possible?  were we no better than chessmen,
moved by an unseen power, vessels the potter fashions at his fancy, for
honour or for shame?  his reason revolted against it, and yet he felt
that some tragedy was hanging over him, and that he had been suddenly
called upon to bear an intolerable burden.  actors are so fortunate.
they can choose whether they will appear in tragedy or in comedy, whether
they will suffer or make merry, laugh or shed tears.  but in real life it
is different.  most men and women are forced to perform parts for which
they have no qualifications.  our guildensterns play hamlet for us, and
our hamlets have to jest like prince hal.  the world is a stage, but the
play is badly cast.

suddenly mr. podgers entered the room.  when he saw lord arthur he
started, and his coarse, fat face became a sort of greenish-yellow
colour.  the two men’s eyes met, and for a moment there was silence.

‘the duchess has left one of her gloves here, lord arthur, and has asked
me to bring it to her,’ said mr. podgers finally.  ‘ah, i see it on the
sofa!  good evening.’

‘mr. podgers, i must insist on your giving me a straightforward answer to
a question i am going to put to you.’

‘another time, lord arthur, but the duchess is anxious.  i am afraid i
must go.’

‘you shall not go.  the duchess is in no hurry.’

‘ladies should not be kept waiting, lord arthur,’ said mr. podgers, with
his sickly smile.  ‘the fair sex is apt to be impatient.’

lord arthur’s finely-chiselled lips curled in petulant disdain.  the poor
duchess seemed to him of very little importance at that moment.  he
walked across the room to where mr. podgers was standing, and held his
hand out.

‘tell me what you saw there,’ he said.  ‘tell me the truth.  i must know
it.  i am not a child.’

mr. podgers’s eyes blinked behind his gold-rimmed spectacles, and he
moved uneasily from one foot to the other, while his fingers played
nervously with a flash watch-chain.

‘what makes you think that i saw anything in your hand, lord arthur, more
than i told you?’

‘i know you did, and i insist on your telling me what it was.  i will pay
you.  i will give you a cheque for a hundred pounds.’

the green eyes flashed for a moment, and then became dull again.

‘guineas?’ said mr. podgers at last, in a low voice.

‘certainly.  i will send you a cheque to-morrow.  what is your club?’

‘i have no club.  that is to say, not just at present.  my address is—,
but allow me to give you my card’; and producing a bit of gilt-edge
pasteboard from his waistcoat pocket, mr. podgers handed it, with a low
bow, to lord arthur, who read on it,

                          _mr. septimus r. podgers_
                         _professional cheiromantist_
                          103_a_ _west moon street_

‘my hours are from ten to four,’ murmured mr. podgers mechanically, ‘and
i make a reduction for families.’

‘be quick,’ cried lord arthur, looking very pale, and holding his hand
out.

mr. podgers glanced nervously round, and drew the heavy _portière_ across
the door.

‘it will take a little time, lord arthur, you had better sit down.’

‘be quick, sir,’ cried lord arthur again, stamping his foot angrily on
the polished floor.

mr. podgers smiled, drew from his breast-pocket a small magnifying glass,
and wiped it carefully with his handkerchief.

‘i am quite ready,’ he said.



chapter ii


ten minutes later, with face blanched by terror, and eyes wild with
grief, lord arthur savile rushed from bentinck house, crushing his way
through the crowd of fur-coated footmen that stood round the large
striped awning, and seeming not to see or hear anything.  the night was
bitter cold, and the gas-lamps round the square flared and flickered in
the keen wind; but his hands were hot with fever, and his forehead burned
like fire.  on and on he went, almost with the gait of a drunken man.  a
policeman looked curiously at him as he passed, and a beggar, who
slouched from an archway to ask for alms, grew frightened, seeing misery
greater than his own.  once he stopped under a lamp, and looked at his
hands.  he thought he could detect the stain of blood already upon them,
and a faint cry broke from his trembling lips.

murder! that is what the cheiromantist had seen there.  murder!  the very
night seemed to know it, and the desolate wind to howl it in his ear.
the dark corners of the streets were full of it.  it grinned at him from
the roofs of the houses.

first he came to the park, whose sombre woodland seemed to fascinate him.
he leaned wearily up against the railings, cooling his brow against the
wet metal, and listening to the tremulous silence of the trees.  ‘murder!
murder!’ he kept repeating, as though iteration could dim the horror of
the word.  the sound of his own voice made him shudder, yet he almost
hoped that echo might hear him, and wake the slumbering city from its
dreams.  he felt a mad desire to stop the casual passer-by, and tell him
everything.

then he wandered across oxford street into narrow, shameful alleys.  two
women with painted faces mocked at him as he went by.  from a dark
courtyard came a sound of oaths and blows, followed by shrill screams,
and, huddled upon a damp door-step, he saw the crook-backed forms of
poverty and eld.  a strange pity came over him.  were these children of
sin and misery predestined to their end, as he to his?  were they, like
him, merely the puppets of a monstrous show?

and yet it was not the mystery, but the comedy of suffering that struck
him; its absolute uselessness, its grotesque want of meaning.  how
incoherent everything seemed!  how lacking in all harmony!  he was amazed
at the discord between the shallow optimism of the day, and the real
facts of existence.  he was still very young.

after a time he found himself in front of marylebone church.  the silent
roadway looked like a long riband of polished silver, flecked here and
there by the dark arabesques of waving shadows.  far into the distance
curved the line of flickering gas-lamps, and outside a little walled-in
house stood a solitary hansom, the driver asleep inside.  he walked
hastily in the direction of portland place, now and then looking round,
as though he feared that he was being followed.  at the corner of rich
street stood two men, reading a small bill upon a hoarding.  an odd
feeling of curiosity stirred him, and he crossed over.  as he came near,
the word ‘murder,’ printed in black letters, met his eye.  he started,
and a deep flush came into his cheek.  it was an advertisement offering a
reward for any information leading to the arrest of a man of medium
height, between thirty and forty years of age, wearing a billy-cock hat,
a black coat, and check trousers, and with a scar upon his right cheek.
he read it over and over again, and wondered if the wretched man would be
caught, and how he had been scarred.  perhaps, some day, his own name
might be placarded on the walls of london.  some day, perhaps, a price
would be set on his head also.

the thought made him sick with horror.  he turned on his heel, and
hurried on into the night.

where he went he hardly knew.  he had a dim memory of wandering through a
labyrinth of sordid houses, of being lost in a giant web of sombre
streets, and it was bright dawn when he found himself at last in
piccadilly circus.  as he strolled home towards belgrave square, he met
the great waggons on their way to covent garden.  the white-smocked
carters, with their pleasant sunburnt faces and coarse curly hair, strode
sturdily on, cracking their whips, and calling out now and then to each
other; on the back of a huge grey horse, the leader of a jangling team,
sat a chubby boy, with a bunch of primroses in his battered hat, keeping
tight hold of the mane with his little hands, and laughing; and the great
piles of vegetables looked like masses of jade against the morning sky,
like masses of green jade against the pink petals of some marvellous
rose.  lord arthur felt curiously affected, he could not tell why.  there
was something in the dawn’s delicate loveliness that seemed to him
inexpressibly pathetic, and he thought of all the days that break in
beauty, and that set in storm.  these rustics, too, with their rough,
good-humoured voices, and their nonchalant ways, what a strange london
they saw!  a london free from the sin of night and the smoke of day, a
pallid, ghost-like city, a desolate town of tombs!  he wondered what they
thought of it, and whether they knew anything of its splendour and its
shame, of its fierce, fiery-coloured joys, and its horrible hunger, of
all it makes and mars from morn to eve.  probably it was to them merely a
mart where they brought their fruits to sell, and where they tarried for
a few hours at most, leaving the streets still silent, the houses still
asleep.  it gave him pleasure to watch them as they went by.  rude as
they were, with their heavy, hob-nailed shoes, and their awkward gait,
they brought a little of a ready with them.  he felt that they had lived
with nature, and that she had taught them peace.  he envied them all that
they did not know.

by the time he had reached belgrave square the sky was a faint blue, and
the birds were beginning to twitter in the gardens.



chapter iii


when lord arthur woke it was twelve o’clock, and the midday sun was
streaming through the ivory-silk curtains of his room.  he got up and
looked out of the window.  a dim haze of heat was hanging over the great
city, and the roofs of the houses were like dull silver.  in the
flickering green of the square below some children were flitting about
like white butterflies, and the pavement was crowded with people on their
way to the park.  never had life seemed lovelier to him, never had the
things of evil seemed more remote.

then his valet brought him a cup of chocolate on a tray.  after he had
drunk it, he drew aside a heavy _portière_ of peach-coloured plush, and
passed into the bathroom.  the light stole softly from above, through
thin slabs of transparent onyx, and the water in the marble tank
glimmered like a moonstone.  he plunged hastily in, till the cool ripples
touched throat and hair, and then dipped his head right under, as though
he would have wiped away the stain of some shameful memory.  when he
stepped out he felt almost at peace.  the exquisite physical conditions
of the moment had dominated him, as indeed often happens in the case of
very finely-wrought natures, for the senses, like fire, can purify as
well as destroy.

after breakfast, he flung himself down on a divan, and lit a cigarette.
on the mantel-shelf, framed in dainty old brocade, stood a large
photograph of sybil merton, as he had seen her first at lady noel’s ball.
the small, exquisitely-shaped head drooped slightly to one side, as
though the thin, reed-like throat could hardly bear the burden of so much
beauty; the lips were slightly parted, and seemed made for sweet music;
and all the tender purity of girlhood looked out in wonder from the
dreaming eyes.  with her soft, clinging dress of _crêpe-de-chine_, and
her large leaf-shaped fan, she looked like one of those delicate little
figures men find in the olive-woods near tanagra; and there was a touch
of greek grace in her pose and attitude.  yet she was not _petite_.  she
was simply perfectly proportioned—a rare thing in an age when so many
women are either over life-size or insignificant.

now as lord arthur looked at her, he was filled with the terrible pity
that is born of love.  he felt that to marry her, with the doom of murder
hanging over his head, would be a betrayal like that of judas, a sin
worse than any the borgia had ever dreamed of.  what happiness could
there be for them, when at any moment he might be called upon to carry
out the awful prophecy written in his hand?  what manner of life would be
theirs while fate still held this fearful fortune in the scales?  the
marriage must be postponed, at all costs.  of this he was quite resolved.
ardently though he loved the girl, and the mere touch of her fingers,
when they sat together, made each nerve of his body thrill with exquisite
joy, he recognised none the less clearly where his duty lay, and was
fully conscious of the fact that he had no right to marry until he had
committed the murder.  this done, he could stand before the altar with
sybil merton, and give his life into her hands without terror of
wrongdoing.  this done, he could take her to his arms, knowing that she
would never have to blush for him, never have to hang her head in shame.
but done it must be first; and the sooner the better for both.

many men in his position would have preferred the primrose path of
dalliance to the steep heights of duty; but lord arthur was too
conscientious to set pleasure above principle.  there was more than mere
passion in his love; and sybil was to him a symbol of all that is good
and noble.  for a moment he had a natural repugnance against what he was
asked to do, but it soon passed away.  his heart told him that it was not
a sin, but a sacrifice; his reason reminded him that there was no other
course open.  he had to choose between living for himself and living for
others, and terrible though the task laid upon him undoubtedly was, yet
he knew that he must not suffer selfishness to triumph over love.  sooner
or later we are all called upon to decide on the same issue—of us all,
the same question is asked.  to lord arthur it came early in life—before
his nature had been spoiled by the calculating cynicism of middle-age, or
his heart corroded by the shallow, fashionable egotism of our day, and he
felt no hesitation about doing his duty.  fortunately also, for him, he
was no mere dreamer, or idle dilettante.  had he been so, he would have
hesitated, like hamlet, and let irresolution mar his purpose.  but he was
essentially practical.  life to him meant action, rather than thought.
he had that rarest of all things, common sense.

the wild, turbid feelings of the previous night had by this time
completely passed away, and it was almost with a sense of shame that he
looked back upon his mad wanderings from street to street, his fierce
emotional agony.  the very sincerity of his sufferings made them seem
unreal to him now.  he wondered how he could have been so foolish as to
rant and rave about the inevitable.  the only question that seemed to
trouble him was, whom to make away with; for he was not blind to the fact
that murder, like the religions of the pagan world, requires a victim as
well as a priest.  not being a genius, he had no enemies, and indeed he
felt that this was not the time for the gratification of any personal
pique or dislike, the mission in which he was engaged being one of great
and grave solemnity.  he accordingly made out a list of his friends and
relatives on a sheet of notepaper, and after careful consideration,
decided in favour of lady clementina beauchamp, a dear old lady who lived
in curzon street, and was his own second cousin by his mother’s side.  he
had always been very fond of lady clem, as every one called her, and as
he was very wealthy himself, having come into all lord rugby’s property
when he came of age, there was no possibility of his deriving any vulgar
monetary advantage by her death.  in fact, the more he thought over the
matter, the more she seemed to him to be just the right person, and,
feeling that any delay would be unfair to sybil, he determined to make
his arrangements at once.

the first thing to be done was, of course, to settle with the
cheiromantist; so he sat down at a small sheraton writing-table that
stood near the window, drew a cheque for £105, payable to the order of
mr. septimus podgers, and, enclosing it in an envelope, told his valet to
take it to west moon street.  he then telephoned to the stables for his
hansom, and dressed to go out.  as he was leaving the room he looked back
at sybil merton’s photograph, and swore that, come what may, he would
never let her know what he was doing for her sake, but would keep the
secret of his self-sacrifice hidden always in his heart.

on his way to the buckingham, he stopped at a florist’s, and sent sybil a
beautiful basket of narcissus, with lovely white petals and staring
pheasants’ eyes, and on arriving at the club, went straight to the
library, rang the bell, and ordered the waiter to bring him a
lemon-and-soda, and a book on toxicology.  he had fully decided that
poison was the best means to adopt in this troublesome business.
anything like personal violence was extremely distasteful to him, and
besides, he was very anxious not to murder lady clementina in any way
that might attract public attention, as he hated the idea of being
lionised at lady windermere’s, or seeing his name figuring in the
paragraphs of vulgar society—newspapers.  he had also to think of sybil’s
father and mother, who were rather old-fashioned people, and might
possibly object to the marriage if there was anything like a scandal,
though he felt certain that if he told them the whole facts of the case
they would be the very first to appreciate the motives that had actuated
him.  he had every reason, then, to decide in favour of poison.  it was
safe, sure, and quiet, and did away with any necessity for painful
scenes, to which, like most englishmen, he had a rooted objection.

of the science of poisons, however, he knew absolutely nothing, and as
the waiter seemed quite unable to find anything in the library but
_ruff’s guide_ and _bailey’s magazine_, he examined the book-shelves
himself, and finally came across a handsomely-bound edition of the
_pharmacopoeia_, and a copy of erskine’s _toxicology_, edited by sir
mathew reid, the president of the royal college of physicians, and one of
the oldest members of the buckingham, having been elected in mistake for
somebody else; a _contretemps_ that so enraged the committee, that when
the real man came up they black-balled him unanimously.  lord arthur was
a good deal puzzled at the technical terms used in both books, and had
begun to regret that he had not paid more attention to his classics at
oxford, when in the second volume of erskine, he found a very interesting
and complete account of the properties of aconitine, written in fairly
clear english.  it seemed to him to be exactly the poison he wanted.  it
was swift—indeed, almost immediate, in its effect—perfectly painless, and
when taken in the form of a gelatine capsule, the mode recommended by sir
mathew, not by any means unpalatable.  he accordingly made a note, upon
his shirt-cuff, of the amount necessary for a fatal dose, put the books
back in their places, and strolled up st. james’s street, to pestle and
humbey’s, the great chemists.  mr. pestle, who always attended personally
on the aristocracy, was a good deal surprised at the order, and in a very
deferential manner murmured something about a medical certificate being
necessary.  however, as soon as lord arthur explained to him that it was
for a large norwegian mastiff that he was obliged to get rid of, as it
showed signs of incipient rabies, and had already bitten the coachman
twice in the calf of the leg, he expressed himself as being perfectly
satisfied, complimented lord arthur on his wonderful knowledge of
toxicology, and had the prescription made up immediately.

lord arthur put the capsule into a pretty little silver _bonbonnière_
that he saw in a shop window in bond street, threw away pestle and
hambey’s ugly pill-box, and drove off at once to lady clementina’s.

‘well, _monsieur le mauvais sujet_,’ cried the old lady, as he entered
the room, ‘why haven’t you been to see me all this time?’

‘my dear lady clem, i never have a moment to myself,’ said lord arthur,
smiling.

‘i suppose you mean that you go about all day long with miss sybil
merton, buying _chiffons_ and talking nonsense?  i cannot understand why
people make such a fuss about being married.  in my day we never dreamed
of billing and cooing in public, or in private for that matter.’

‘i assure you i have not seen sybil for twenty-four hours, lady clem.  as
far as i can make out, she belongs entirely to her milliners.’

‘of course; that is the only reason you come to see an ugly old woman
like myself.  i wonder you men don’t take warning.  _on a fait des folies
pour moi_, and here i am, a poor rheumatic creature, with a false front
and a bad temper.  why, if it were not for dear lady jansen, who sends me
all the worst french novels she can find, i don’t think i could get
through the day.  doctors are no use at all, except to get fees out of
one.  they can’t even cure my heartburn.’

‘i have brought you a cure for that, lady clem,’ said lord arthur
gravely.  ‘it is a wonderful thing, invented by an american.’

‘i don’t think i like american inventions, arthur.  i am quite sure i
don’t.  i read some american novels lately, and they were quite
nonsensical.’

‘oh, but there is no nonsense at all about this, lady clem!  i assure you
it is a perfect cure.  you must promise to try it’; and lord arthur
brought the little box out of his pocket, and handed it to her.

‘well, the box is charming, arthur.  is it really a present?  that is
very sweet of you.  and is this the wonderful medicine?  it looks like a
_bonbon_.  i’ll take it at once.’

‘good heavens!  lady clem,’ cried lord arthur, catching hold of her hand,
‘you mustn’t do anything of the kind.  it is a homoeopathic medicine, and
if you take it without having heartburn, it might do you no end of harm.
wait till you have an attack, and take it then.  you will be astonished
at the result.’

‘i should like to take it now,’ said lady clementina, holding up to the
light the little transparent capsule, with its floating bubble of liquid
aconitine.  i am sure it is delicious.  the fact is that, though i hate
doctors, i love medicines.  however, i’ll keep it till my next attack.’

‘and when will that be?’ asked lord arthur eagerly.  ‘will it be soon?’

‘i hope not for a week.  i had a very bad time yesterday morning with it.
but one never knows.’

‘you are sure to have one before the end of the month then, lady clem?’

‘i am afraid so.  but how sympathetic you are to-day, arthur!  really,
sybil has done you a great deal of good.  and now you must run away, for
i am dining with some very dull people, who won’t talk scandal, and i
know that if i don’t get my sleep now i shall never be able to keep awake
during dinner.  good-bye, arthur, give my love to sybil, and thank you so
much for the american medicine.’

‘you won’t forget to take it, lady clem, will you?’ said lord arthur,
rising from his seat.

‘of course i won’t, you silly boy.  i think it is most kind of you to
think of me, and i shall write and tell you if i want any more.’

lord arthur left the house in high spirits, and with a feeling of immense
relief.

that night he had an interview with sybil merton.  he told her how he had
been suddenly placed in a position of terrible difficulty, from which
neither honour nor duty would allow him to recede.  he told her that the
marriage must be put off for the present, as until he had got rid of his
fearful entanglements, he was not a free man.  he implored her to trust
him, and not to have any doubts about the future.  everything would come
right, but patience was necessary.

the scene took place in the conservatory of mr. merton’s house, in park
lane, where lord arthur had dined as usual.  sybil had never seemed more
happy, and for a moment lord arthur had been tempted to play the coward’s
part, to write to lady clementina for the pill, and to let the marriage
go on as if there was no such person as mr. podgers in the world.  his
better nature, however, soon asserted itself, and even when sybil flung
herself weeping into his arms, he did not falter.  the beauty that
stirred his senses had touched his conscience also.  he felt that to
wreck so fair a life for the sake of a few months’ pleasure would be a
wrong thing to do.

he stayed with sybil till nearly midnight, comforting her and being
comforted in turn, and early the next morning he left for venice, after
writing a manly, firm letter to mr. merton about the necessary
postponement of the marriage.



chapter iv


in venice he met his brother, lord surbiton, who happened to have come
over from corfu in his yacht.  the two young men spent a delightful
fortnight together.  in the morning they rode on the lido, or glided up
and down the green canals in their long black gondola; in the afternoon
they usually entertained visitors on the yacht; and in the evening they
dined at florian’s, and smoked innumerable cigarettes on the piazza.  yet
somehow lord arthur was not happy.  every day he studied the obituary
column in the _times_, expecting to see a notice of lady clementina’s
death, but every day he was disappointed.  he began to be afraid that
some accident had happened to her, and often regretted that he had
prevented her taking the aconitine when she had been so anxious to try
its effect.  sybil’s letters, too, though full of love, and trust, and
tenderness, were often very sad in their tone, and sometimes he used to
think that he was parted from her for ever.

after a fortnight lord surbiton got bored with venice, and determined to
run down the coast to ravenna, as he heard that there was some capital
cock-shooting in the pinetum.  lord arthur at first refused absolutely to
come, but surbiton, of whom he was extremely fond, finally persuaded him
that if he stayed at danieli’s by himself he would be moped to death, and
on the morning of the 15th they started, with a strong nor’-east wind
blowing, and a rather choppy sea.  the sport was excellent, and the free,
open-air life brought the colour back to lord arthur’s cheek, but about
the 22nd he became anxious about lady clementina, and, in spite of
surbiton’s remonstrances, came back to venice by train.

as he stepped out of his gondola on to the hotel steps, the proprietor
came forward to meet him with a sheaf of telegrams.  lord arthur snatched
them out of his hand, and tore them open.  everything had been
successful.  lady clementina had died quite suddenly on the night of the
17th!

his first thought was for sybil, and he sent her off a telegram
announcing his immediate return to london.  he then ordered his valet to
pack his things for the night mail, sent his gondoliers about five times
their proper fare, and ran up to his sitting-room with a light step and a
buoyant heart.  there he found three letters waiting for him.  one was
from sybil herself, full of sympathy and condolence.  the others were
from his mother, and from lady clementina’s solicitor.  it seemed that
the old lady had dined with the duchess that very night, had delighted
every one by her wit and _esprit_, but had gone home somewhat early,
complaining of heartburn.  in the morning she was found dead in her bed,
having apparently suffered no pain.  sir mathew reid had been sent for at
once, but, of course, there was nothing to be done, and she was to be
buried on the 22nd at beauchamp chalcote.  a few days before she died she
had made her will, and left lord arthur her little house in curzon
street, and all her furniture, personal effects, and pictures, with the
exception of her collection of miniatures, which was to go to her sister,
lady margaret rufford, and her amethyst necklace, which sybil merton was
to have.  the property was not of much value; but mr. mansfield, the
solicitor, was extremely anxious for lord arthur to return at once, if
possible, as there were a great many bills to be paid, and lady
clementina had never kept any regular accounts.

lord arthur was very much touched by lady clementina’s kind remembrance
of him, and felt that mr. podgers had a great deal to answer for.  his
love of sybil, however, dominated every other emotion, and the
consciousness that he had done his duty gave him peace and comfort.  when
he arrived at charing cross, he felt perfectly happy.

the mertons received him very kindly.  sybil made him promise that he
would never again allow anything to come between them, and the marriage
was fixed for the 7th june.  life seemed to him once more bright and
beautiful, and all his old gladness came back to him again.

one day, however, as he was going over the house in curzon street, in
company with lady clementina’s solicitor and sybil herself, burning
packages of faded letters, and turning out drawers of odd rubbish, the
young girl suddenly gave a little cry of delight.

‘what have you found, sybil?’ said lord arthur, looking up from his work,
and smiling.

‘this lovely little silver _bonbonnière_, arthur.  isn’t it quaint and
dutch?  do give it to me!  i know amethysts won’t become me till i am
over eighty.’

it was the box that had held the aconitine.

lord arthur started, and a faint blush came into his cheek.  he had
almost entirely forgotten what he had done, and it seemed to him a
curious coincidence that sybil, for whose sake he had gone through all
that terrible anxiety, should have been the first to remind him of it.

‘of course you can have it, sybil.  i gave it to poor lady clem myself.’

‘oh! thank you, arthur; and may i have the _bonbon_ too?  i had no notion
that lady clementina liked sweets.  i thought she was far too
intellectual.’

lord arthur grew deadly pale, and a horrible idea crossed his mind.

‘_bonbon_, sybil?  what do you mean?’ he said in a slow, hoarse voice.

‘there is one in it, that is all.  it looks quite old and dusty, and i
have not the slightest intention of eating it.  what is the matter,
arthur?  how white you look!’

lord arthur rushed across the room, and seized the box.  inside it was
the amber-coloured capsule, with its poison-bubble.  lady clementina had
died a natural death after all!

the shock of the discovery was almost too much for him.  he flung the
capsule into the fire, and sank on the sofa with a cry of despair.



chapter v


mr. merton was a good deal distressed at the second postponement of the
marriage, and lady julia, who had already ordered her dress for the
wedding, did all in her power to make sybil break off the match.  dearly,
however, as sybil loved her mother, she had given her whole life into
lord arthur’s hands, and nothing that lady julia could say could make her
waver in her faith.  as for lord arthur himself, it took him days to get
over his terrible disappointment, and for a time his nerves were
completely unstrung.  his excellent common sense, however, soon asserted
itself, and his sound, practical mind did not leave him long in doubt
about what to do.  poison having proved a complete failure, dynamite, or
some other form of explosive, was obviously the proper thing to try.

he accordingly looked again over the list of his friends and relatives,
and, after careful consideration, determined to blow up his uncle, the
dean of chichester.  the dean, who was a man of great culture and
learning, was extremely fond of clocks, and had a wonderful collection of
timepieces, ranging from the fifteenth century to the present day, and it
seemed to lord arthur that this hobby of the good dean’s offered him an
excellent opportunity for carrying out his scheme.  where to procure an
explosive machine was, of course, quite another matter.  the london
directory gave him no information on the point, and he felt that there
was very little use in going to scotland yard about it, as they never
seemed to know anything about the movements of the dynamite faction till
after an explosion had taken place, and not much even then.

suddenly he thought of his friend rouvaloff, a young russian of very
revolutionary tendencies, whom he had met at lady windermere’s in the
winter.  count rouvaloff was supposed to be writing a life of peter the
great, and to have come over to england for the purpose of studying the
documents relating to that tsar’s residence in this country as a ship
carpenter; but it was generally suspected that he was a nihilist agent,
and there was no doubt that the russian embassy did not look with any
favour upon his presence in london.  lord arthur felt that he was just
the man for his purpose, and drove down one morning to his lodgings in
bloomsbury, to ask his advice and assistance.

‘so you are taking up politics seriously?’ said count rouvaloff, when
lord arthur had told him the object of his mission; but lord arthur, who
hated swagger of any kind, felt bound to admit to him that he had not the
slightest interest in social questions, and simply wanted the explosive
machine for a purely family matter, in which no one was concerned but
himself.

count rouvaloff looked at him for some moments in amazement, and then
seeing that he was quite serious, wrote an address on a piece of paper,
initialled it, and handed it to him across the table.

‘scotland yard would give a good deal to know this address, my dear
fellow.’

‘they shan’t have it,’ cried lord arthur, laughing; and after shaking the
young russian warmly by the hand he ran downstairs, examined the paper,
and told the coachman to drive to soho square.

there he dismissed him, and strolled down greek street, till he came to a
place called bayle’s court.  he passed under the archway, and found
himself in a curious _cul-de-sac_, that was apparently occupied by a
french laundry, as a perfect network of clothes-lines was stretched
across from house to house, and there was a flutter of white linen in the
morning air.  he walked right to the end, and knocked at a little green
house.  after some delay, during which every window in the court became a
blurred mass of peering faces, the door was opened by a rather
rough-looking foreigner, who asked him in very bad english what his
business was.  lord arthur handed him the paper count rouvaloff had given
him.  when the man saw it he bowed, and invited lord arthur into a very
shabby front parlour on the ground floor, and in a few moments herr
winckelkopf, as he was called in england, bustled into the room, with a
very wine-stained napkin round his neck, and a fork in his left hand.

‘count rouvaloff has given me an introduction to you,’ said lord arthur,
bowing, ‘and i am anxious to have a short interview with you on a matter
of business.  my name is smith, mr. robert smith, and i want you to
supply me with an explosive clock.’

‘charmed to meet you, lord arthur,’ said the genial little german,
laughing.  ‘don’t look so alarmed, it is my duty to know everybody, and i
remember seeing you one evening at lady windermere’s.  i hope her
ladyship is quite well.  do you mind sitting with me while i finish my
breakfast?  there is an excellent _pâté_, and my friends are kind enough
to say that my rhine wine is better than any they get at the german
embassy,’ and before lord arthur had got over his surprise at being
recognised, he found himself seated in the back-room, sipping the most
delicious marcobrünner out of a pale yellow hock-glass marked with the
imperial monogram, and chatting in the friendliest manner possible to the
famous conspirator.

‘explosive clocks,’ said herr winckelkopf, ‘are not very good things for
foreign exportation, as, even if they succeed in passing the custom
house, the train service is so irregular, that they usually go off before
they have reached their proper destination.  if, however, you want one
for home use, i can supply you with an excellent article, and guarantee
that you will he satisfied with the result.  may i ask for whom it is
intended?  if it is for the police, or for any one connected with
scotland yard, i am afraid i cannot do anything for you.  the english
detectives are really our best friends, and i have always found that by
relying on their stupidity, we can do exactly what we like.  i could not
spare one of them.’

‘i assure you,’ said lord arthur, ‘that it has nothing to do with the
police at all.  in fact, the clock is intended for the dean of
chichester.’

‘dear me!  i had no idea that you felt so strongly about religion, lord
arthur.  few young men do nowadays.’

‘i am afraid you overrate me, herr winckelkopf,’ said lord arthur,
blushing.  ‘the fact is, i really know nothing about theology.’

‘it is a purely private matter then?’

‘purely private.’

herr winckelkopf shrugged his shoulders, and left the room, returning in
a few minutes with a round cake of dynamite about the size of a penny,
and a pretty little french clock, surmounted by an ormolu figure of
liberty trampling on the hydra of despotism.

lord arthur’s face brightened up when he saw it.  ‘that is just what i
want,’ he cried, ‘and now tell me how it goes off.’

‘ah! there is my secret,’ answered herr winckelkopf, contemplating his
invention with a justifiable look of pride; ‘let me know when you wish it
to explode, and i will set the machine to the moment.’

‘well, to-day is tuesday, and if you could send it off at once—’

‘that is impossible; i have a great deal of important work on hand for
some friends of mine in moscow.  still, i might send it off to-morrow.’

‘oh, it will be quite time enough!’ said lord arthur politely, ‘if it is
delivered to-morrow night or thursday morning.  for the moment of the
explosion, say friday at noon exactly.  the dean is always at home at
that hour.’

‘friday, at noon,’ repeated herr winckelkopf, and he made a note to that
effect in a large ledger that was lying on a bureau near the fireplace.

‘and now,’ said lord arthur, rising from his seat, ‘pray let me know how
much i am in your debt.’

‘it is such a small matter, lord arthur, that i do not care to make any
charge.  the dynamite comes to seven and sixpence, the clock will be
three pounds ten, and the carriage about five shillings.  i am only too
pleased to oblige any friend of count rouvaloff’s.’

‘but your trouble, herr winckelkopf?’

‘oh, that is nothing!  it is a pleasure to me.  i do not work for money;
i live entirely for my art.’

lord arthur laid down £4, 2s. 6d. on the table, thanked the little german
for his kindness, and, having succeeded in declining an invitation to
meet some anarchists at a meat-tea on the following saturday, left the
house and went off to the park.

for the next two days he was in a state of the greatest excitement, and
on friday at twelve o’clock he drove down to the buckingham to wait for
news.  all the afternoon the stolid hall-porter kept posting up telegrams
from various parts of the country giving the results of horse-races, the
verdicts in divorce suits, the state of the weather, and the like, while
the tape ticked out wearisome details about an all-night sitting in the
house of commons, and a small panic on the stock exchange.  at four
o’clock the evening papers came in, and lord arthur disappeared into the
library with the _pall mall_, the _st. james’s_, the _globe_, and the
_echo_, to the immense indignation of colonel goodchild, who wanted to
read the reports of a speech he had delivered that morning at the mansion
house, on the subject of south african missions, and the advisability of
having black bishops in every province, and for some reason or other had
a strong prejudice against the _evening news_.  none of the papers,
however, contained even the slightest allusion to chichester, and lord
arthur felt that the attempt must have failed.  it was a terrible blow to
him, and for a time he was quite unnerved.  herr winckelkopf, whom he
went to see the next day was full of elaborate apologies, and offered to
supply him with another clock free of charge, or with a case of
nitro-glycerine bombs at cost price.  but he had lost all faith in
explosives, and herr winckelkopf himself acknowledged that everything is
so adulterated nowadays, that even dynamite can hardly be got in a pure
condition.  the little german, however, while admitting that something
must have gone wrong with the machinery, was not without hope that the
clock might still go off, and instanced the case of a barometer that he
had once sent to the military governor at odessa, which, though timed to
explode in ten days, had not done so for something like three months.  it
was quite true that when it did go off, it merely succeeded in blowing a
housemaid to atoms, the governor having gone out of town six weeks
before, but at least it showed that dynamite, as a destructive force,
was, when under the control of machinery, a powerful, though a somewhat
unpunctual agent.  lord arthur was a little consoled by this reflection,
but even here he was destined to disappointment, for two days afterwards,
as he was going upstairs, the duchess called him into her boudoir, and
showed him a letter she had just received from the deanery.

‘jane writes charming letters,’ said the duchess; ‘you must really read
her last.  it is quite as good as the novels mudie sends us.’

lord arthur seized the letter from her hand.  it ran as follows:—

                                                  the deanery, chichester,
                                                             27_th_ _may_.

    my dearest aunt,

    thank you so much for the flannel for the dorcas society, and also
    for the gingham.  i quite agree with you that it is nonsense their
    wanting to wear pretty things, but everybody is so radical and
    irreligious nowadays, that it is difficult to make them see that they
    should not try and dress like the upper classes.  i am sure i don’t
    know what we are coming to.  as papa has often said in his sermons,
    we live in an age of unbelief.

    we have had great fun over a clock that an unknown admirer sent papa
    last thursday.  it arrived in a wooden box from london, carriage
    paid, and papa feels it must have been sent by some one who had read
    his remarkable sermon, ‘is licence liberty?’ for on the top of the
    clock was a figure of a woman, with what papa said was the cap of
    liberty on her head.  i didn’t think it very becoming myself, but
    papa said it was historical, so i suppose it is all right.  parker
    unpacked it, and papa put it on the mantelpiece in the library, and
    we were all sitting there on friday morning, when just as the clock
    struck twelve, we heard a whirring noise, a little puff of smoke came
    from the pedestal of the figure, and the goddess of liberty fell off,
    and broke her nose on the fender!  maria was quite alarmed, but it
    looked so ridiculous, that james and i went off into fits of
    laughter, and even papa was amused.  when we examined it, we found it
    was a sort of alarum clock, and that, if you set it to a particular
    hour, and put some gunpowder and a cap under a little hammer, it went
    off whenever you wanted.  papa said it must not remain in the
    library, as it made a noise, so reggie carried it away to the
    schoolroom, and does nothing but have small explosions all day long.
    do you think arthur would like one for a wedding present?  i suppose
    they are quite fashionable in london.  papa says they should do a
    great deal of good, as they show that liberty can’t last, but must
    fall down.  papa says liberty was invented at the time of the french
    revolution.  how awful it seems!

    i have now to go to the dorcas, where i will read them your most
    instructive letter.  how true, dear aunt, your idea is, that in their
    rank of life they should wear what is unbecoming.  i must say it is
    absurd, their anxiety about dress, when there are so many more
    important things in this world, and in the next.  i am so glad your
    flowered poplin turned out so well, and that your lace was not torn.
    i am wearing my yellow satin, that you so kindly gave me, at the
    bishop’s on wednesday, and think it will look all right.  would you
    have bows or not?  jennings says that every one wears bows now, and
    that the underskirt should be frilled.  reggie has just had another
    explosion, and papa has ordered the clock to be sent to the stables.
    i don’t think papa likes it so much as he did at first, though he is
    very flattered at being sent such a pretty and ingenious toy.  it
    shows that people read his sermons, and profit by them.

    papa sends his love, in which james, and reggie, and maria all unite,
    and, hoping that uncle cecil’s gout is better, believe me, dear aunt,
    ever your affectionate niece,

                                                               jane percy.

    _ps._—do tell me about the bows.  jennings insists they are the
    fashion.

lord arthur looked so serious and unhappy over the letter, that the
duchess went into fits of laughter.

‘my dear arthur,’ she cried, ‘i shall never show you a young lady’s
letter again!  but what shall i say about the clock?  i think it is a
capital invention, and i should like to have one myself.’

‘i don’t think much of them,’ said lord arthur, with a sad smile, and,
after kissing his mother, he left the room.

when he got upstairs, he flung himself on a sofa, and his eyes filled
with tears.  he had done his best to commit this murder, but on both
occasions he had failed, and through no fault of his own.  he had tried
to do his duty, but it seemed as if destiny herself had turned traitor.
he was oppressed with the sense of the barrenness of good intentions, of
the futility of trying to be fine.  perhaps, it would be better to break
off the marriage altogether.  sybil would suffer, it is true, but
suffering could not really mar a nature so noble as hers.  as for
himself, what did it matter?  there is always some war in which a man can
die, some cause to which a man can give his life, and as life had no
pleasure for him, so death had no terror.  let destiny work out his doom.
he would not stir to help her.

at half-past seven he dressed, and went down to the club.  surbiton was
there with a party of young men, and he was obliged to dine with them.
their trivial conversation and idle jests did not interest him, and as
soon as coffee was brought he left them, inventing some engagement in
order to get away.  as he was going out of the club, the hall-porter
handed him a letter.  it was from herr winckelkopf, asking him to call
down the next evening, and look at an explosive umbrella, that went off
as soon as it was opened.  it was the very latest invention, and had just
arrived from geneva.  he tore the letter up into fragments.  he had made
up his mind not to try any more experiments.  then he wandered down to
the thames embankment, and sat for hours by the river.  the moon peered
through a mane of tawny clouds, as if it were a lion’s eye, and
innumerable stars spangled the hollow vault, like gold dust powdered on a
purple dome.  now and then a barge swung out into the turbid stream, and
floated away with the tide, and the railway signals changed from green to
scarlet as the trains ran shrieking across the bridge.  after some time,
twelve o’clock boomed from the tall tower at westminster, and at each
stroke of the sonorous bell the night seemed to tremble.  then the
railway lights went out, one solitary lamp left gleaming like a large
ruby on a giant mast, and the roar of the city became fainter.

at two o’clock he got up, and strolled towards blackfriars.  how unreal
everything looked!  how like a strange dream!  the houses on the other
side of the river seemed built out of darkness.  one would have said that
silver and shadow had fashioned the world anew.  the huge dome of st.
paul’s loomed like a bubble through the dusky air.

as he approached cleopatra’s needle he saw a man leaning over the
parapet, and as he came nearer the man looked up, the gas-light falling
full upon his face.

it was mr. podgers, the cheiromantist!  no one could mistake the fat,
flabby face, the gold-rimmed spectacles, the sickly feeble smile, the
sensual mouth.

lord arthur stopped.  a brilliant idea flashed across him, and he stole
softly up behind.  in a moment he had seized mr. podgers by the legs, and
flung him into the thames.  there was a coarse oath, a heavy splash, and
all was still.  lord arthur looked anxiously over, but could see nothing
of the cheiromantist but a tall hat, pirouetting in an eddy of moonlit
water.  after a time it also sank, and no trace of mr. podgers was
visible.  once he thought that he caught sight of the bulky misshapen
figure striking out for the staircase by the bridge, and a horrible
feeling of failure came over him, but it turned out to be merely a
reflection, and when the moon shone out from behind a cloud it passed
away.  at last he seemed to have realised the decree of destiny.  he
heaved a deep sigh of relief, and sybil’s name came to his lips.

‘have you dropped anything, sir?’ said a voice behind him suddenly.

he turned round, and saw a policeman with a bull’s-eye lantern.

‘nothing of importance, sergeant,’ he answered, smiling, and hailing a
passing hansom, he jumped in, and told the man to drive to belgrave
square.

for the next few days he alternated between hope and fear.  there were
moments when he almost expected mr. podgers to walk into the room, and
yet at other times he felt that fate could not be so unjust to him.
twice he went to the cheiromantist’s address in west moon street, but he
could not bring himself to ring the bell.  he longed for certainty, and
was afraid of it.

finally it came.  he was sitting in the smoking-room of the club having
tea, and listening rather wearily to surbiton’s account of the last comic
song at the gaiety, when the waiter came in with the evening papers.  he
took up the _st. james’s_, and was listlessly turning over its pages,
when this strange heading caught his eye:

                         suicide of a cheiromantist.

he turned pale with excitement, and began to read.  the paragraph ran as
follows:

    yesterday morning, at seven o’clock, the body of mr. septimus r.
    podgers, the eminent cheiromantist, was washed on shore at greenwich,
    just in front of the ship hotel.  the unfortunate gentleman had been
    missing for some days, and considerable anxiety for his safety had
    been felt in cheiromantic circles.  it is supposed that he committed
    suicide under the influence of a temporary mental derangement, caused
    by overwork, and a verdict to that effect was returned this afternoon
    by the coroner’s jury.  mr. podgers had just completed an elaborate
    treatise on the subject of the human hand, that will shortly be
    published, when it will no doubt attract much attention.  the
    deceased was sixty-five years of age, and does not seem to have left
    any relations.

lord arthur rushed out of the club with the paper still in his hand, to
the immense amazement of the hall-porter, who tried in vain to stop him,
and drove at once to park lane.  sybil saw him from the window, and
something told her that he was the bearer of good news.  she ran down to
meet him, and, when she saw his face, she knew that all was well.

‘my dear sybil,’ cried lord arthur, ‘let us be married to-morrow!’

‘you foolish boy!  why, the cake is not even ordered!’ said sybil,
laughing through her tears.



chapter vi


when the wedding took place, some three weeks later, st. peter’s was
crowded with a perfect mob of smart people.  the service was read in the
most impressive manner by the dean of chichester, and everybody agreed
that they had never seen a handsomer couple than the bride and
bridegroom.  they were more than handsome, however—they were happy.
never for a single moment did lord arthur regret all that he had suffered
for sybil’s sake, while she, on her side, gave him the best things a
woman can give to any man—worship, tenderness, and love.  for them
romance was not killed by reality.  they always felt young.

some years afterwards, when two beautiful children had been born to them,
lady windermere came down on a visit to alton priory, a lovely old place,
that had been the duke’s wedding present to his son; and one afternoon as
she was sitting with lady arthur under a lime-tree in the garden,
watching the little boy and girl as they played up and down the
rose-walk, like fitful sunbeams, she suddenly took her hostess’s hand in
hers, and said, ‘are you happy, sybil?’

‘dear lady windermere, of course i am happy.  aren’t you?’

‘i have no time to be happy, sybil.  i always like the last person who is
introduced to me; but, as a rule, as soon as i know people i get tired of
them.’

‘don’t your lions satisfy you, lady windermere?’

‘oh dear, no! lions are only good for one season.  as soon as their manes
are cut, they are the dullest creatures going.  besides, they behave very
badly, if you are really nice to them.  do you remember that horrid mr.
podgers?  he was a dreadful impostor.  of course, i didn’t mind that at
all, and even when he wanted to borrow money i forgave him, but i could
not stand his making love to me.  he has really made me hate cheiromancy.
i go in for telepathy now.  it is much more amusing.’

‘you mustn’t say anything against cheiromancy here, lady windermere; it
is the only subject that arthur does not like people to chaff about.  i
assure you he is quite serious over it.’

‘you don’t mean to say that he believes in it, sybil?’

‘ask him, lady windermere, here he is’; and lord arthur came up the
garden with a large bunch of yellow roses in his hand, and his two
children dancing round him.

‘lord arthur?’

‘yes, lady windermere.’

‘you don’t mean to say that you believe in cheiromancy?’

‘of course i do,’ said the young man, smiling.

‘but why?’

‘because i owe to it all the happiness of my life,’ he murmured, throwing
himself into a wicker chair.

‘my dear lord arthur, what do you owe to it?’

‘sybil,’ he answered, handing his wife the roses, and looking into her
violet eyes.

‘what nonsense!’ cried lady windermere.  ‘i never heard such nonsense in
all my life.’




the canterville ghost
a hylo-idealistic romance


chapter i


when mr. hiram b. otis, the american minister, bought canterville chase,
every one told him he was doing a very foolish thing, as there was no
doubt at all that the place was haunted.  indeed, lord canterville
himself, who was a man of the most punctilious honour, had felt it his
duty to mention the fact to mr. otis when they came to discuss terms.

‘we have not cared to live in the place ourselves,’ said lord
canterville, ‘since my grandaunt, the dowager duchess of bolton, was
frightened into a fit, from which she never really recovered, by two
skeleton hands being placed on her shoulders as she was dressing for
dinner, and i feel bound to tell you, mr. otis, that the ghost has been
seen by several living members of my family, as well as by the rector of
the parish, the rev. augustus dampier, who is a fellow of king’s college,
cambridge.  after the unfortunate accident to the duchess, none of our
younger servants would stay with us, and lady canterville often got very
little sleep at night, in consequence of the mysterious noises that came
from the corridor and the library.’

‘my lord,’ answered the minister, ‘i will take the furniture and the
ghost at a valuation.  i come from a modern country, where we have
everything that money can buy; and with all our spry young fellows
painting the old world red, and carrying off your best actresses and
prima-donnas, i reckon that if there were such a thing as a ghost in
europe, we’d have it at home in a very short time in one of our public
museums, or on the road as a show.’

‘i fear that the ghost exists,’ said lord canterville, smiling, ‘though
it may have resisted the overtures of your enterprising impresarios.  it
has been well known for three centuries, since 1584 in fact, and always
makes its appearance before the death of any member of our family.’

‘well, so does the family doctor for that matter, lord canterville.  but
there is no such thing, sir, as a ghost, and i guess the laws of nature
are not going to be suspended for the british aristocracy.’

‘you are certainly very natural in america,’ answered lord canterville,
who did not quite understand mr. otis’s last observation, ‘and if you
don’t mind a ghost in the house, it is all right.  only you must remember
i warned you.’

a few weeks after this, the purchase was completed, and at the close of
the season the minister and his family went down to canterville chase.
mrs. otis, who, as miss lucretia r. tappan, of west 53rd street, had been
a celebrated new york belle, was now a very handsome, middle-aged woman,
with fine eyes, and a superb profile.  many american ladies on leaving
their native land adopt an appearance of chronic ill-health, under the
impression that it is a form of european refinement, but mrs. otis had
never fallen into this error.  she had a magnificent constitution, and a
really wonderful amount of animal spirits.  indeed, in many respects, she
was quite english, and was an excellent example of the fact that we have
really everything in common with america nowadays, except, of course,
language.  her eldest son, christened washington by his parents in a
moment of patriotism, which he never ceased to regret, was a fair-haired,
rather good-looking young man, who had qualified himself for american
diplomacy by leading the german at the newport casino for three
successive seasons, and even in london was well known as an excellent
dancer.  gardenias and the peerage were his only weaknesses.  otherwise
he was extremely sensible.  miss virginia e. otis was a little girl of
fifteen, lithe and lovely as a fawn, and with a fine freedom in her large
blue eyes.  she was a wonderful amazon, and had once raced old lord
bilton on her pony twice round the park, winning by a length and a half,
just in front of the achilles statue, to the huge delight of the young
duke of cheshire, who proposed for her on the spot, and was sent back to
eton that very night by his guardians, in floods of tears.  after
virginia came the twins, who were usually called ‘the stars and stripes,’
as they were always getting swished.  they were delightful boys, and with
the exception of the worthy minister the only true republicans of the
family.

as canterville chase is seven miles from ascot, the nearest railway
station, mr. otis had telegraphed for a waggonette to meet them, and they
started on their drive in high spirits.  it was a lovely july evening,
and the air was delicate with the scent of the pine-woods.  now and then
they heard a wood pigeon brooding over its own sweet voice, or saw, deep
in the rustling fern, the burnished breast of the pheasant.  little
squirrels peered at them from the beech-trees as they went by, and the
rabbits scudded away through the brushwood and over the mossy knolls,
with their white tails in the air.  as they entered the avenue of
canterville chase, however, the sky became suddenly overcast with clouds,
a curious stillness seemed to hold the atmosphere, a great flight of
rooks passed silently over their heads, and, before they reached the
house, some big drops of rain had fallen.

standing on the steps to receive them was an old woman, neatly dressed in
black silk, with a white cap and apron.  this was mrs. umney, the
housekeeper, whom mrs. otis, at lady canterville’s earnest request, had
consented to keep on in her former position.  she made them each a low
curtsey as they alighted, and said in a quaint, old-fashioned manner, ‘i
bid you welcome to canterville chase.’  following her, they passed
through the fine tudor hall into the library, a long, low room, panelled
in black oak, at the end of which was a large stained-glass window.  here
they found tea laid out for them, and, after taking off their wraps, they
sat down and began to look round, while mrs. umney waited on them.

suddenly mrs. otis caught sight of a dull red stain on the floor just by
the fireplace and, quite unconscious of what it really signified, said to
mrs. umney, ‘i am afraid something has been spilt there.’

‘yes, madam,’ replied the old housekeeper in a low voice, ‘blood has been
spilt on that spot.’

‘how horrid,’ cried mrs. otis; ‘i don’t at all care for blood-stains in a
sitting-room.  it must be removed at once.’

the old woman smiled, and answered in the same low, mysterious voice, ‘it
is the blood of lady eleanore de canterville, who was murdered on that
very spot by her own husband, sir simon de canterville, in 1575.  sir
simon survived her nine years, and disappeared suddenly under very
mysterious circumstances.  his body has never been discovered, but his
guilty spirit still haunts the chase.  the blood-stain has been much
admired by tourists and others, and cannot be removed.’

‘that is all nonsense,’ cried washington otis; ‘pinkerton’s champion
stain remover and paragon detergent will clean it up in no time,’ and
before the terrified housekeeper could interfere he had fallen upon his
knees, and was rapidly scouring the floor with a small stick of what
looked like a black cosmetic.  in a few moments no trace of the
blood-stain could be seen.

‘i knew pinkerton would do it,’ he exclaimed triumphantly, as he looked
round at his admiring family; but no sooner had he said these words than
a terrible flash of lightning lit up the sombre room, a fearful peal of
thunder made them all start to their feet, and mrs. umney fainted.

‘what a monstrous climate!’ said the american minister calmly, as he lit
a long cheroot.  ‘i guess the old country is so overpopulated that they
have not enough decent weather for everybody.  i have always been of
opinion that emigration is the only thing for england.’

‘my dear hiram,’ cried mrs. otis, ‘what can we do with a woman who
faints?’

‘charge it to her like breakages,’ answered the minister; ‘she won’t
faint after that’; and in a few moments mrs. umney certainly came to.
there was no doubt, however, that she was extremely upset, and she
sternly warned mr. otis to beware of some trouble coming to the house.

‘i have seen things with my own eyes, sir,’ she said, ‘that would make
any christian’s hair stand on end, and many and many a night i have not
closed my eyes in sleep for the awful things that are done here.’  mr.
otis, however, and his wife warmly assured the honest soul that they were
not afraid of ghosts, and, after invoking the blessings of providence on
her new master and mistress, and making arrangements for an increase of
salary, the old housekeeper tottered off to her own room.



chapter ii


the storm raged fiercely all that night, but nothing of particular note
occurred.  the next morning, however, when they came down to breakfast,
they found the terrible stain of blood once again on the floor.  ‘i don’t
think it can be the fault of the paragon detergent,’ said washington,
‘for i have tried it with everything.  it must be the ghost.’  he
accordingly rubbed out the stain a second time, but the second morning it
appeared again.  the third morning also it was there, though the library
had been locked up at night by mr. otis himself, and the key carried
upstairs.  the whole family were now quite interested; mr. otis began to
suspect that he had been too dogmatic in his denial of the existence of
ghosts, mrs. otis expressed her intention of joining the psychical
society, and washington prepared a long letter to messrs. myers and
podmore on the subject of the permanence of sanguineous stains when
connected with crime.  that night all doubts about the objective
existence of phantasmata were removed for ever.

the day had been warm and sunny; and, in the cool of the evening, the
whole family went out for a drive.  they did not return home till nine
o’clock, when they had a light supper.  the conversation in no way turned
upon ghosts, so there were not even those primary conditions of receptive
expectation which so often precede the presentation of psychical
phenomena.  the subjects discussed, as i have since learned from mr.
otis, were merely such as form the ordinary conversation of cultured
americans of the better class, such as the immense superiority of miss
fanny davenport over sarah bernhardt as an actress; the difficulty of
obtaining green corn, buckwheat cakes, and hominy, even in the best
english houses; the importance of boston in the development of the
world-soul; the advantages of the baggage check system in railway
travelling; and the sweetness of the new york accent as compared to the
london drawl.  no mention at all was made of the supernatural, nor was
sir simon de canterville alluded to in any way.  at eleven o’clock the
family retired, and by half-past all the lights were out.  some time
after, mr. otis was awakened by a curious noise in the corridor, outside
his room.  it sounded like the clank of metal, and seemed to be coming
nearer every moment.  he got up at once, struck a match, and looked at
the time.  it was exactly one o’clock.  he was quite calm, and felt his
pulse, which was not at all feverish.  the strange noise still continued,
and with it he heard distinctly the sound of footsteps.  he put on his
slippers, took a small oblong phial out of his dressing-case, and opened
the door.  right in front of him he saw, in the wan moonlight, an old man
of terrible aspect.  his eyes were as red burning coals; long grey hair
fell over his shoulders in matted coils; his garments, which were of
antique cut, were soiled and ragged, and from his wrists and ankles hung
heavy manacles and rusty gyves.

‘my dear sir,’ said mr. otis, ‘i really must insist on your oiling those
chains, and have brought you for that purpose a small bottle of the
tammany rising sun lubricator.  it is said to be completely efficacious
upon one application, and there are several testimonials to that effect
on the wrapper from some of our most eminent native divines.  i shall
leave it here for you by the bedroom candles, and will be happy to supply
you with more should you require it.’  with these words the united states
minister laid the bottle down on a marble table, and, closing his door,
retired to rest.

for a moment the canterville ghost stood quite motionless in natural
indignation; then, dashing the bottle violently upon the polished floor,
he fled down the corridor, uttering hollow groans, and emitting a ghastly
green light.  just, however, as he reached the top of the great oak
staircase, a door was flung open, two little white-robed figures
appeared, and a large pillow whizzed past his head!  there was evidently
no time to be lost, so, hastily adopting the fourth dimension of space as
a means of escape, he vanished through the wainscoting, and the house
became quite quiet.

on reaching a small secret chamber in the left wing, he leaned up against
a moonbeam to recover his breath, and began to try and realise his
position.  never, in a brilliant and uninterrupted career of three
hundred years, had he been so grossly insulted.  he thought of the
dowager duchess, whom he had frightened into a fit as she stood before
the glass in her lace and diamonds; of the four housemaids, who had gone
off into hysterics when he merely grinned at them through the curtains of
one of the spare bedrooms; of the rector of the parish, whose candle he
had blown out as he was coming late one night from the library, and who
had been under the care of sir william gull ever since, a perfect martyr
to nervous disorders; and of old madame de tremouillac, who, having
wakened up one morning early and seen a skeleton seated in an arm-chair
by the fire reading her diary, had been confined to her bed for six weeks
with an attack of brain fever, and, on her recovery, had become
reconciled to the church, and broken off her connection with that
notorious sceptic monsieur de voltaire.  he remembered the terrible night
when the wicked lord canterville was found choking in his dressing-room,
with the knave of diamonds half-way down his throat, and confessed, just
before he died, that he had cheated charles james fox out of £50,000 at
crockford’s by means of that very card, and swore that the ghost had made
him swallow it.  all his great achievements came back to him again, from
the butler who had shot himself in the pantry because he had seen a green
hand tapping at the window pane, to the beautiful lady stutfield, who was
always obliged to wear a black velvet band round her throat to hide the
mark of five fingers burnt upon her white skin, and who drowned herself
at last in the carp-pond at the end of the king’s walk.  with the
enthusiastic egotism of the true artist he went over his most celebrated
performances, and smiled bitterly to himself as he recalled to mind his
last appearance as ‘red ruben, or the strangled babe,’ his _début_ as
‘gaunt gibeon, the blood-sucker of bexley moor,’ and the _furore_ he had
excited one lovely june evening by merely playing ninepins with his own
bones upon the lawn-tennis ground.  and after all this, some wretched
modern americans were to come and offer him the rising sun lubricator,
and throw pillows at his head!  it was quite unbearable.  besides, no
ghosts in history had ever been treated in this manner.  accordingly, he
determined to have vengeance, and remained till daylight in an attitude
of deep thought.



chapter iii


the next morning when the otis family met at breakfast, they discussed
the ghost at some length.  the united states minister was naturally a
little annoyed to find that his present had not been accepted.  ‘i have
no wish,’ he said, ‘to do the ghost any personal injury, and i must say
that, considering the length of time he has been in the house, i don’t
think it is at all polite to throw pillows at him’—a very just remark, at
which, i am sorry to say, the twins burst into shouts of laughter.  ‘upon
the other hand,’ he continued, ‘if he really declines to use the rising
sun lubricator, we shall have to take his chains from him.  it would be
quite impossible to sleep, with such a noise going on outside the
bedrooms.’

for the rest of the week, however, they were undisturbed, the only thing
that excited any attention being the continual renewal of the blood-stain
on the library floor.  this certainly was very strange, as the door was
always locked at night by mr. otis, and the windows kept closely barred.
the chameleon-like colour, also, of the stain excited a good deal of
comment.  some mornings it was a dull (almost indian) red, then it would
be vermilion, then a rich purple, and once when they came down for family
prayers, according to the simple rites of the free american reformed
episcopalian church, they found it a bright emerald-green.  these
kaleidoscopic changes naturally amused the party very much, and bets on
the subject were freely made every evening.  the only person who did not
enter into the joke was little virginia, who, for some unexplained
reason, was always a good deal distressed at the sight of the
blood-stain, and very nearly cried the morning it was emerald-green.

the second appearance of the ghost was on sunday night.  shortly after
they had gone to bed they were suddenly alarmed by a fearful crash in the
hall.  rushing downstairs, they found that a large suit of old armour had
become detached from its stand, and had fallen on the stone floor, while,
seated in a high-backed chair, was the canterville ghost, rubbing his
knees with an expression of acute agony on his face.  the twins, having
brought their pea-shooters with them, at once discharged two pellets on
him, with that accuracy of aim which can only be attained by long and
careful practice on a writing-master, while the united states minister
covered him with his revolver, and called upon him, in accordance with
californian etiquette, to hold up his hands!  the ghost started up with a
wild shriek of rage, and swept through them like a mist, extinguishing
washington otis’s candle as he passed, and so leaving them all in total
darkness.  on reaching the top of the staircase he recovered himself, and
determined to give his celebrated peal of demoniac laughter.  this he had
on more than one occasion found extremely useful.  it was said to have
turned lord raker’s wig grey in a single night, and had certainly made
three of lady canterville’s french governesses give warning before their
month was up.  he accordingly laughed his most horrible laugh, till the
old vaulted roof rang and rang again, but hardly had the fearful echo
died away when a door opened, and mrs. otis came out in a light blue
dressing-gown.  ‘i am afraid you are far from well,’ she said, ‘and have
brought you a bottle of dr. dobell’s tincture.  if it is indigestion, you
will find it a most excellent remedy.’  the ghost glared at her in fury,
and began at once to make preparations for turning himself into a large
black dog, an accomplishment for which he was justly renowned, and to
which the family doctor always attributed the permanent idiocy of lord
canterville’s uncle, the hon. thomas horton.  the sound of approaching
footsteps, however, made him hesitate in his fell purpose, so he
contented himself with becoming faintly phosphorescent, and vanished with
a deep churchyard groan, just as the twins had come up to him.

on reaching his room he entirely broke down, and became a prey to the
most violent agitation.  the vulgarity of the twins, and the gross
materialism of mrs. otis, were naturally extremely annoying, but what
really distressed him most was, that he had been unable to wear the suit
of mail.  he had hoped that even modern americans would be thrilled by
the sight of a spectre in armour, if for no more sensible reason, at
least out of respect for their national poet longfellow, over whose
graceful and attractive poetry he himself had whiled away many a weary
hour when the cantervilles were up in town.  besides, it was his own
suit.  he had worn it with great success at the kenilworth tournament,
and had been highly complimented on it by no less a person than the
virgin queen herself.  yet when he had put it on, he had been completely
overpowered by the weight of the huge breastplate and steel casque, and
had fallen heavily on the stone pavement, barking both his knees
severely, and bruising the knuckles of his right hand.

for some days after this he was extremely ill, and hardly stirred out of
his room at all, except to keep the blood-stain in proper repair.
however, by taking great care of himself, he recovered, and resolved to
make a third attempt to frighten the united states minister and his
family.  he selected friday, the 17th of august, for his appearance, and
spent most of that day in looking over his wardrobe, ultimately deciding
in favour of a large slouched hat with a red feather, a winding-sheet
frilled at the wrists and neck, and a rusty dagger.  towards evening a
violent storm of rain came on, and the wind was so high that all the
windows and doors in the old house shook and rattled.  in fact, it was
just such weather as he loved.  his plan of action was this.  he was to
make his way quietly to washington otis’s room, gibber at him from the
foot of the bed, and stab himself three times in the throat to the sound
of slow music.  he bore washington a special grudge, being quite aware
that it was he who was in the habit of removing the famous canterville
blood-stain, by means of pinkerton’s paragon detergent.  having reduced
the reckless and foolhardy youth to a condition of abject terror, he was
then to proceed to the room occupied by the united states minister and
his wife, and there to place a clammy hand on mrs. otis’s forehead, while
he hissed into her trembling husband’s ear the awful secrets of the
charnel-house.  with regard to little virginia, he had not quite made up
his mind.  she had never insulted him in any way, and was pretty and
gentle.  a few hollow groans from the wardrobe, he thought, would be more
than sufficient, or, if that failed to wake her, he might grabble at the
counterpane with palsy-twitching fingers.  as for the twins, he was quite
determined to teach them a lesson.  the first thing to be done was, of
course, to sit upon their chests, so as to produce the stifling sensation
of nightmare.  then, as their beds were quite close to each other, to
stand between them in the form of a green, icy-cold corpse, till they
became paralysed with fear, and finally, to throw off the winding-sheet,
and crawl round the room, with white bleached bones and one rolling
eye-ball, in the character of ‘dumb daniel, or the suicide’s skeleton,’ a
_rôle_ in which he had on more than one occasion produced a great effect,
and which he considered quite equal to his famous part of ‘martin the
maniac, or the masked mystery.’

at half-past ten he heard the family going to bed.  for some time he was
disturbed by wild shrieks of laughter from the twins, who, with the
light-hearted gaiety of schoolboys, were evidently amusing themselves
before they retired to rest, but at a quarter past eleven all was still,
and, as midnight sounded, he sallied forth.  the owl beat against the
window panes, the raven croaked from the old yew-tree, and the wind
wandered moaning round the house like a lost soul; but the otis family
slept unconscious of their doom, and high above the rain and storm he
could hear the steady snoring of the minister for the united states.  he
stepped stealthily out of the wainscoting, with an evil smile on his
cruel, wrinkled mouth, and the moon hid her face in a cloud as he stole
past the great oriel window, where his own arms and those of his murdered
wife were blazoned in azure and gold.  on and on he glided, like an evil
shadow, the very darkness seeming to loathe him as he passed.  once he
thought he heard something call, and stopped; but it was only the baying
of a dog from the red farm, and he went on, muttering strange
sixteenth-century curses, and ever and anon brandishing the rusty dagger
in the midnight air.  finally he reached the corner of the passage that
led to luckless washington’s room.  for a moment he paused there, the
wind blowing his long grey locks about his head, and twisting into
grotesque and fantastic folds the nameless horror of the dead man’s
shroud.  then the clock struck the quarter, and he felt the time was
come.  he chuckled to himself, and turned the corner; but no sooner had
he done so, than, with a piteous wail of terror, he fell back, and hid
his blanched face in his long, bony hands.  right in front of him was
standing a horrible spectre, motionless as a carven image, and monstrous
as a madman’s dream!  its head was bald and burnished; its face round,
and fat, and white; and hideous laughter seemed to have writhed its
features into an eternal grin.  from the eyes streamed rays of scarlet
light, the mouth was a wide well of fire, and a hideous garment, like to
his own, swathed with its silent snows the titan form.  on its breast was
a placard with strange writing in antique characters, some scroll of
shame it seemed, some record of wild sins, some awful calendar of crime,
and, with its right hand, it bore aloft a falchion of gleaming steel.

never having seen a ghost before, he naturally was terribly frightened,
and, after a second hasty glance at the awful phantom, he fled back to
his room, tripping up in his long winding-sheet as he sped down the
corridor, and finally dropping the rusty dagger into the minister’s
jack-boots, where it was found in the morning by the butler.  once in the
privacy of his own apartment, he flung himself down on a small
pallet-bed, and hid his face under the clothes.  after a time, however,
the brave old canterville spirit asserted itself, and he determined to go
and speak to the other ghost as soon as it was daylight.  accordingly,
just as the dawn was touching the hills with silver, he returned towards
the spot where he had first laid eyes on the grisly phantom, feeling
that, after all, two ghosts were better than one, and that, by the aid of
his new friend, he might safely grapple with the twins.  on reaching the
spot, however, a terrible sight met his gaze.  something had evidently
happened to the spectre, for the light had entirely faded from its hollow
eyes, the gleaming falchion had fallen from its hand, and it was leaning
up against the wall in a strained and uncomfortable attitude.  he rushed
forward and seized it in his arms, when, to his horror, the head slipped
off and rolled on the floor, the body assumed a recumbent posture, and he
found himself clasping a white dimity bed-curtain, with a sweeping-brush,
a kitchen cleaver, and a hollow turnip lying at his feet!  unable to
understand this curious transformation, he clutched the placard with
feverish haste, and there, in the grey morning light, he read these
fearful words:—

                                ye olde ghoste

                      ye onlie true and originale spook.
                          beware of ye imitationes.
                         all others are counterfeite.

the whole thing flashed across him.  he had been tricked, foiled, and
outwitted!  the old canterville look came into his eyes; he ground his
toothless gums together; and, raising his withered hands high above his
head, swore, according to the picturesque phraseology of the antique
school, that when chanticleer had sounded twice his merry horn, deeds of
blood would be wrought, and murder walk abroad with silent feet.

hardly had he finished this awful oath when, from the red-tiled roof of a
distant homestead, a cock crew.  he laughed a long, low, bitter laugh,
and waited.  hour after hour he waited, but the cock, for some strange
reason, did not crow again.  finally, at half-past seven, the arrival of
the housemaids made him give up his fearful vigil, and he stalked back to
his room, thinking of his vain hope and baffled purpose.  there he
consulted several books of ancient chivalry, of which he was exceedingly
fond, and found that, on every occasion on which his oath had been used,
chanticleer had always crowed a second time.  ‘perdition seize the
naughty fowl,’ he muttered, ‘i have seen the day when, with my stout
spear, i would have run him through the gorge, and made him crow for me
an ’twere in death!’  he then retired to a comfortable lead coffin, and
stayed there till evening.



chapter iv


the next day the ghost was very weak and tired.  the terrible excitement
of the last four weeks was beginning to have its effect.  his nerves were
completely shattered, and he started at the slightest noise.  for five
days he kept his room, and at last made up his mind to give up the point
of the blood-stain on the library floor.  if the otis family did not want
it, they clearly did not deserve it.  they were evidently people on a
low, material plane of existence, and quite incapable of appreciating the
symbolic value of sensuous phenomena.  the question of phantasmic
apparitions, and the development of astral bodies, was of course quite a
different matter, and really not under his control.  it was his solemn
duty to appear in the corridor once a week, and to gibber from the large
oriel window on the first and third wednesday in every month, and he did
not see how he could honourably escape from his obligations.  it is quite
true that his life had been very evil, but, upon the other hand, he was
most conscientious in all things connected with the supernatural.  for
the next three saturdays, accordingly, he traversed the corridor as usual
between midnight and three o’clock, taking every possible precaution
against being either heard or seen.  he removed his boots, trod as
lightly as possible on the old worm-eaten boards, wore a large black
velvet cloak, and was careful to use the rising sun lubricator for oiling
his chains.  i am bound to acknowledge that it was with a good deal of
difficulty that he brought himself to adopt this last mode of protection.
however, one night, while the family were at dinner, he slipped into mr.
otis’s bedroom and carried off the bottle.  he felt a little humiliated
at first, but afterwards was sensible enough to see that there was a
great deal to be said for the invention, and, to a certain degree, it
served his purpose.  still, in spite of everything, he was not left
unmolested.  strings were continually being stretched across the
corridor, over which he tripped in the dark, and on one occasion, while
dressed for the part of ‘black isaac, or the huntsman of hogley woods,’
he met with a severe fall, through treading on a butter-slide, which the
twins had constructed from the entrance of the tapestry chamber to the
top of the oak staircase.  this last insult so enraged him, that he
resolved to make one final effort to assert his dignity and social
position, and determined to visit the insolent young etonians the next
night in his celebrated character of ‘reckless rupert, or the headless
earl.’

he had not appeared in this disguise for more than seventy years; in
fact, not since he had so frightened pretty lady barbara modish by means
of it, that she suddenly broke off her engagement with the present lord
canterville’s grandfather, and ran away to gretna green with handsome
jack castleton, declaring that nothing in the world would induce her to
marry into a family that allowed such a horrible phantom to walk up and
down the terrace at twilight.  poor jack was afterwards shot in a duel by
lord canterville on wandsworth common, and lady barbara died of a broken
heart at tunbridge wells before the year was out, so, in every way, it
had been a great success.  it was, however, an extremely difficult
‘make-up,’ if i may use such a theatrical expression in connection with
one of the greatest mysteries of the supernatural, or, to employ a more
scientific term, the higher-natural world, and it took him fully three
hours to make his preparations.  at last everything was ready, and he was
very pleased with his appearance.  the big leather riding-boots that went
with the dress were just a little too large for him, and he could only
find one of the two horse-pistols, but, on the whole, he was quite
satisfied, and at a quarter past one he glided out of the wainscoting and
crept down the corridor.  on reaching the room occupied by the twins,
which i should mention was called the blue bed chamber, on account of the
colour of its hangings, he found the door just ajar.  wishing to make an
effective entrance, he flung it wide open, when a heavy jug of water fell
right down on him, wetting him to the skin, and just missing his left
shoulder by a couple of inches.  at the same moment he heard stifled
shrieks of laughter proceeding from the four-post bed.  the shock to his
nervous system was so great that he fled back to his room as hard as he
could go, and the next day he was laid up with a severe cold.  the only
thing that at all consoled him in the whole affair was the fact that he
had not brought his head with him, for, had he done so, the consequences
might have been very serious.

he now gave up all hope of ever frightening this rude american family,
and contented himself, as a rule, with creeping about the passages in
list slippers, with a thick red muffler round his throat for fear of
draughts, and a small arquebuse, in case he should be attacked by the
twins.  the final blow he received occurred on the 19th of september.  he
had gone downstairs to the great entrance-hall, feeling sure that there,
at any rate, he would be quite unmolested, and was amusing himself by
making satirical remarks on the large saroni photographs of the united
states minister and his wife, which had now taken the place of the
canterville family pictures.  he was simply but neatly clad in a long
shroud, spotted with churchyard mould, had tied up his jaw with a strip
of yellow linen, and carried a small lantern and a sexton’s spade.  in
fact, he was dressed for the character of ‘jonas the graveless, or the
corpse-snatcher of chertsey barn,’ one of his most remarkable
impersonations, and one which the cantervilles had every reason to
remember, as it was the real origin of their quarrel with their
neighbour, lord rufford.  it was about a quarter past two o’clock in the
morning, and, as far as he could ascertain, no one was stirring.  as he
was strolling towards the library, however, to see if there were any
traces left of the blood-stain, suddenly there leaped out on him from a
dark corner two figures, who waved their arms wildly above their heads,
and shrieked out ‘boo!’ in his ear.

seized with a panic, which, under the circumstances, was only natural, he
rushed for the staircase, but found washington otis waiting for him there
with the big garden-syringe; and being thus hemmed in by his enemies on
every side, and driven almost to bay, he vanished into the great iron
stove, which, fortunately for him, was not lit, and had to make his way
home through the flues and chimneys, arriving at his own room in a
terrible state of dirt, disorder, and despair.

after this he was not seen again on any nocturnal expedition.  the twins
lay in wait for him on several occasions, and strewed the passages with
nutshells every night to the great annoyance of their parents and the
servants, but it was of no avail.  it was quite evident that his feelings
were so wounded that he would not appear.  mr. otis consequently resumed
his great work on the history of the democratic party, on which he had
been engaged for some years; mrs. otis organised a wonderful clam-bake,
which amazed the whole county; the boys took to lacrosse, euchre, poker,
and other american national games; and virginia rode about the lanes on
her pony, accompanied by the young duke of cheshire, who had come to
spend the last week of his holidays at canterville chase.  it was
generally assumed that the ghost had gone away, and, in fact, mr. otis
wrote a letter to that effect to lord canterville, who, in reply,
expressed his great pleasure at the news, and sent his best
congratulations to the minister’s worthy wife.

the otises, however, were deceived, for the ghost was still in the house,
and though now almost an invalid, was by no means ready to let matters
rest, particularly as he heard that among the guests was the young duke
of cheshire, whose grand-uncle, lord francis stilton, had once bet a
hundred guineas with colonel carbury that he would play dice with the
canterville ghost, and was found the next morning lying on the floor of
the card-room in such a helpless paralytic state, that though he lived on
to a great age, he was never able to say anything again but ‘double
sixes.’  the story was well known at the time, though, of course, out of
respect to the feelings of the two noble families, every attempt was made
to hush it up; and a full account of all the circumstances connected with
it will be found in the third volume of lord tattle’s _recollections of
the prince regent and his friends_.  the ghost, then, was naturally very
anxious to show that he had not lost his influence over the stiltons,
with whom, indeed, he was distantly connected, his own first cousin
having been married _en secondes noces_ to the sieur de bulkeley, from
whom, as every one knows, the dukes of cheshire are lineally descended.
accordingly, he made arrangements for appearing to virginia’s little
lover in his celebrated impersonation of ‘the vampire monk, or, the
bloodless benedictine,’ a performance so horrible that when old lady
startup saw it, which she did on one fatal new year’s eve, in the year
1764, she went off into the most piercing shrieks, which culminated in
violent apoplexy, and died in three days, after disinheriting the
cantervilles, who were her nearest relations, and leaving all her money
to her london apothecary.  at the last moment, however, his terror of the
twins prevented his leaving his room, and the little duke slept in peace
under the great feathered canopy in the royal bedchamber, and dreamed of
virginia.



chapter v


a few days after this, virginia and her curly-haired cavalier went out
riding on brockley meadows, where she tore her habit so badly in getting
through a hedge, that, on her return home, she made up her mind to go up
by the back staircase so as not to be seen.  as she was running past the
tapestry chamber, the door of which happened to be open, she fancied she
saw some one inside, and thinking it was her mother’s maid, who sometimes
used to bring her work there, looked in to ask her to mend her habit.  to
her immense surprise, however, it was the canterville ghost himself!  he
was sitting by the window, watching the ruined gold of the yellowing
trees fly through the air, and the red leaves dancing madly down the long
avenue.  his head was leaning on his hand, and his whole attitude was one
of extreme depression.  indeed, so forlorn, and so much out of repair did
he look, that little virginia, whose first idea had been to run away and
lock herself in her room, was filled with pity, and determined to try and
comfort him.  so light was her footfall, and so deep his melancholy, that
he was not aware of her presence till she spoke to him.

‘i am so sorry for you,’ she said, ‘but my brothers are going back to
eton to-morrow, and then, if you behave yourself, no one will annoy you.’

‘it is absurd asking me to behave myself,’ he answered, looking round in
astonishment at the pretty little girl who had ventured to address him,
‘quite absurd.  i must rattle my chains, and groan through keyholes, and
walk about at night, if that is what you mean.  it is my only reason for
existing.’

‘it is no reason at all for existing, and you know you have been very
wicked.  mrs. umney told us, the first day we arrived here, that you had
killed your wife.’

‘well, i quite admit it,’ said the ghost petulantly, ‘but it was a purely
family matter, and concerned no one else.’

‘it is very wrong to kill any one,’ said virginia, who at times had a
sweet puritan gravity, caught from some old new england ancestor.

‘oh, i hate the cheap severity of abstract ethics!  my wife was very
plain, never had my ruffs properly starched, and knew nothing about
cookery.  why, there was a buck i had shot in hogley woods, a magnificent
pricket, and do you know how she had it sent up to table?  however, it is
no matter now, for it is all over, and i don’t think it was very nice of
her brothers to starve me to death, though i did kill her.’

‘starve you to death?  oh, mr. ghost, i mean sir simon, are you hungry?
i have a sandwich in my case.  would you like it?’

‘no, thank you, i never eat anything now; but it is very kind of you, all
the same, and you are much nicer than the rest of your horrid, rude,
vulgar, dishonest family.’

‘stop!’ cried virginia, stamping her foot, ‘it is you who are rude, and
horrid, and vulgar, and as for dishonesty, you know you stole the paints
out of my box to try and furbish up that ridiculous blood-stain in the
library.  first you took all my reds, including the vermilion, and i
couldn’t do any more sunsets, then you took the emerald-green and the
chrome-yellow, and finally i had nothing left but indigo and chinese
white, and could only do moonlight scenes, which are always depressing to
look at, and not at all easy to paint.  i never told on you, though i was
very much annoyed, and it was most ridiculous, the whole thing; for who
ever heard of emerald-green blood?’

‘well, really,’ said the ghost, rather meekly, ‘what was i to do?  it is
a very difficult thing to get real blood nowadays, and, as your brother
began it all with his paragon detergent, i certainly saw no reason why i
should not have your paints.  as for colour, that is always a matter of
taste: the cantervilles have blue blood, for instance, the very bluest in
england; but i know you americans don’t care for things of this kind.’

‘you know nothing about it, and the best thing you can do is to emigrate
and improve your mind.  my father will be only too happy to give you a
free passage, and though there is a heavy duty on spirits of every kind,
there will be no difficulty about the custom house, as the officers are
all democrats.  once in new york, you are sure to be a great success.  i
know lots of people there who would give a hundred thousand dollars to
have a grandfather, and much more than that to have a family ghost.’

‘i don’t think i should like america.’

‘i suppose because we have no ruins and no curiosities,’ said virginia
satirically.

‘no ruins! no curiosities!’ answered the ghost; ‘you have your navy and
your manners.’

‘good evening; i will go and ask papa to get the twins an extra week’s
holiday.’

‘please don’t go, miss virginia,’ he cried; ‘i am so lonely and so
unhappy, and i really don’t know what to do.  i want to go to sleep and i
cannot.’

‘that’s quite absurd!  you have merely to go to bed and blow out the
candle.  it is very difficult sometimes to keep awake, especially at
church, but there is no difficulty at all about sleeping.  why, even
babies know how to do that, and they are not very clever.’

‘i have not slept for three hundred years,’ he said sadly, and virginia’s
beautiful blue eyes opened in wonder; ‘for three hundred years i have not
slept, and i am so tired.’

virginia grew quite grave, and her little lips trembled like rose-leaves.
she came towards him, and kneeling down at his side, looked up into his
old withered face.

‘poor, poor ghost,’ she murmured; ‘have you no place where you can
sleep?’

‘far away beyond the pine-woods,’ he answered, in a low dreamy voice,
‘there is a little garden.  there the grass grows long and deep, there
are the great white stars of the hemlock flower, there the nightingale
sings all night long.  all night long he sings, and the cold, crystal
moon looks down, and the yew-tree spreads out its giant arms over the
sleepers.’

virginia’s eyes grew dim with tears, and she hid her face in her hands.

‘you mean the garden of death,’ she whispered.

‘yes, death.  death must be so beautiful.  to lie in the soft brown
earth, with the grasses waving above one’s head, and listen to silence.
to have no yesterday, and no to-morrow.  to forget time, to forgive life,
to be at peace.  you can help me.  you can open for me the portals of
death’s house, for love is always with you, and love is stronger than
death is.’

virginia trembled, a cold shudder ran through her, and for a few moments
there was silence.  she felt as if she was in a terrible dream.

then the ghost spoke again, and his voice sounded like the sighing of the
wind.

‘have you ever read the old prophecy on the library window?’

‘oh, often,’ cried the little girl, looking up; ‘i know it quite well.
it is painted in curious black letters, and it is difficult to read.
there are only six lines:

    when a golden girl can win
    prayer from out the lips of sin,
    when the barren almond bears,
    and a little child gives away its tears,
    then shall all the house be still
    and peace come to canterville.

but i don’t know what they mean.’

‘they mean,’ he said sadly, ‘that you must weep for me for my sins,
because i have no tears, and pray with me for my soul, because i have no
faith, and then, if you have always been sweet, and good, and gentle, the
angel of death will have mercy on me.  you will see fearful shapes in
darkness, and wicked voices will whisper in your ear, but they will not
harm you, for against the purity of a little child the powers of hell
cannot prevail.’

virginia made no answer, and the ghost wrung his hands in wild despair as
he looked down at her bowed golden head.  suddenly she stood up, very
pale, and with a strange light in her eyes.  ‘i am not afraid,’ she said
firmly, ‘and i will ask the angel to have mercy on you.’

he rose from his seat with a faint cry of joy, and taking her hand bent
over it with old-fashioned grace and kissed it.  his fingers were as cold
as ice, and his lips burned like fire, but virginia did not falter, as he
led her across the dusky room.  on the faded green tapestry were
broidered little huntsmen.  they blew their tasselled horns and with
their tiny hands waved to her to go back.  ‘go back! little virginia,’
they cried, ‘go back!’ but the ghost clutched her hand more tightly, and
she shut her eyes against them.  horrible animals with lizard tails, and
goggle eyes, blinked at her from the carven chimney-piece, and murmured
‘beware! little virginia, beware! we may never see you again,’ but the
ghost glided on more swiftly, and virginia did not listen.  when they
reached the end of the room he stopped, and muttered some words she could
not understand.  she opened her eyes, and saw the wall slowly fading away
like a mist, and a great black cavern in front of her.  a bitter cold
wind swept round them, and she felt something pulling at her dress.
‘quick, quick,’ cried the ghost, ‘or it will be too late,’ and, in a
moment, the wainscoting had closed behind them, and the tapestry chamber
was empty.



chapter vi


about ten minutes later, the bell rang for tea, and, as virginia did not
come down, mrs. otis sent up one of the footmen to tell her.  after a
little time he returned and said that he could not find miss virginia
anywhere.  as she was in the habit of going out to the garden every
evening to get flowers for the dinner-table, mrs. otis was not at all
alarmed at first, but when six o’clock struck, and virginia did not
appear, she became really agitated, and sent the boys out to look for
her, while she herself and mr. otis searched every room in the house.  at
half-past six the boys came back and said that they could find no trace
of their sister anywhere.  they were all now in the greatest state of
excitement, and did not know what to do, when mr. otis suddenly
remembered that, some few days before, he had given a band of gypsies
permission to camp in the park.  he accordingly at once set off for
blackfell hollow, where he knew they were, accompanied by his eldest son
and two of the farm-servants.  the little duke of cheshire, who was
perfectly frantic with anxiety, begged hard to be allowed to go too, but
mr. otis would not allow him, as he was afraid there might be a scuffle.
on arriving at the spot, however, he found that the gypsies had gone, and
it was evident that their departure had been rather sudden, as the fire
was still burning, and some plates were lying on the grass.  having sent
off washington and the two men to scour the district, he ran home, and
despatched telegrams to all the police inspectors in the county, telling
them to look out for a little girl who had been kidnapped by tramps or
gypsies.  he then ordered his horse to be brought round, and, after
insisting on his wife and the three boys sitting down to dinner, rode off
down the ascot road with a groom.  he had hardly, however, gone a couple
of miles when he heard somebody galloping after him, and, looking round,
saw the little duke coming up on his pony, with his face very flushed and
no hat.  ‘i’m awfully sorry, mr. otis,’ gasped out the boy, ‘but i can’t
eat any dinner as long as virginia is lost.  please, don’t be angry with
me; if you had let us be engaged last year, there would never have been
all this trouble.  you won’t send me back, will you?  i can’t go!  i
won’t go!’

the minister could not help smiling at the handsome young scapegrace, and
was a good deal touched at his devotion to virginia, so leaning down from
his horse, he patted him kindly on the shoulders, and said, ‘well, cecil,
if you won’t go back i suppose you must come with me, but i must get you
a hat at ascot.’

‘oh, bother my hat!  i want virginia!’ cried the little duke, laughing,
and they galloped on to the railway station.  there mr. otis inquired of
the station-master if any one answering the description of virginia had
been seen on the platform, but could get no news of her.  the
station-master, however, wired up and down the line, and assured him that
a strict watch would be kept for her, and, after having bought a hat for
the little duke from a linen-draper, who was just putting up his
shutters, mr. otis rode off to bexley, a village about four miles away,
which he was told was a well-known haunt of the gypsies, as there was a
large common next to it.  here they roused up the rural policeman, but
could get no information from him, and, after riding all over the common,
they turned their horses’ heads homewards, and reached the chase about
eleven o’clock, dead-tired and almost heart-broken.  they found
washington and the twins waiting for them at the gate-house with
lanterns, as the avenue was very dark.  not the slightest trace of
virginia had been discovered.  the gypsies had been caught on brockley
meadows, but she was not with them, and they had explained their sudden
departure by saying that they had mistaken the date of chorton fair, and
had gone off in a hurry for fear they might be late.  indeed, they had
been quite distressed at hearing of virginia’s disappearance, as they
were very grateful to mr. otis for having allowed them to camp in his
park, and four of their number had stayed behind to help in the search.
the carp-pond had been dragged, and the whole chase thoroughly gone over,
but without any result.  it was evident that, for that night at any rate,
virginia was lost to them; and it was in a state of the deepest
depression that mr. otis and the boys walked up to the house, the groom
following behind with the two horses and the pony.  in the hall they
found a group of frightened servants, and lying on a sofa in the library
was poor mrs. otis, almost out of her mind with terror and anxiety, and
having her forehead bathed with eau-de-cologne by the old housekeeper.
mr. otis at once insisted on her having something to eat, and ordered up
supper for the whole party.  it was a melancholy meal, as hardly any one
spoke, and even the twins were awestruck and subdued, as they were very
fond of their sister.  when they had finished, mr. otis, in spite of the
entreaties of the little duke, ordered them all to bed, saying that
nothing more could be done that night, and that he would telegraph in the
morning to scotland yard for some detectives to be sent down immediately.
just as they were passing out of the dining-room, midnight began to boom
from the clock tower, and when the last stroke sounded they heard a crash
and a sudden shrill cry; a dreadful peal of thunder shook the house, a
strain of unearthly music floated through the air, a panel at the top of
the staircase flew back with a loud noise, and out on the landing,
looking very pale and white, with a little casket in her hand, stepped
virginia.  in a moment they had all rushed up to her.  mrs. otis clasped
her passionately in her arms, the duke smothered her with violent kisses,
and the twins executed a wild war-dance round the group.

‘good heavens! child, where have you been?’ said mr. otis, rather
angrily, thinking that she had been playing some foolish trick on them.
‘cecil and i have been riding all over the country looking for you, and
your mother has been frightened to death.  you must never play these
practical jokes any more.’

‘except on the ghost! except on the ghost!’ shrieked the twins, as they
capered about.

‘my own darling, thank god you are found; you must never leave my side
again,’ murmured mrs. otis, as she kissed the trembling child, and
smoothed the tangled gold of her hair.

‘papa,’ said virginia quietly, ‘i have been with the ghost.  he is dead,
and you must come and see him.  he had been very wicked, but he was
really sorry for all that he had done, and he gave me this box of
beautiful jewels before he died.’

the whole family gazed at her in mute amazement, but she was quite grave
and serious; and, turning round, she led them through the opening in the
wainscoting down a narrow secret corridor, washington following with a
lighted candle, which he had caught up from the table.  finally, they
came to a great oak door, studded with rusty nails.  when virginia
touched it, it swung back on its heavy hinges, and they found themselves
in a little low room, with a vaulted ceiling, and one tiny grated window.
imbedded in the wall was a huge iron ring, and chained to it was a gaunt
skeleton, that was stretched out at full length on the stone floor, and
seemed to be trying to grasp with its long fleshless fingers an
old-fashioned trencher and ewer, that were placed just out of its reach.
the jug had evidently been once filled with water, as it was covered
inside with green mould.  there was nothing on the trencher but a pile of
dust.  virginia knelt down beside the skeleton, and, folding her little
hands together, began to pray silently, while the rest of the party
looked on in wonder at the terrible tragedy whose secret was now
disclosed to them.

‘hallo!’ suddenly exclaimed one of the twins, who had been looking out of
the window to try and discover in what wing of the house the room was
situated.  ‘hallo! the old withered almond-tree has blossomed.  i can see
the flowers quite plainly in the moonlight.’

‘god has forgiven him,’ said virginia gravely, as she rose to her feet,
and a beautiful light seemed to illumine her face.

‘what an angel you are!’ cried the young duke, and he put his arm round
her neck and kissed her.



chapter vii


four days after these curious incidents a funeral started from
canterville chase at about eleven o’clock at night.  the hearse was drawn
by eight black horses, each of which carried on its head a great tuft of
nodding ostrich-plumes, and the leaden coffin was covered by a rich
purple pall, on which was embroidered in gold the canterville
coat-of-arms.  by the side of the hearse and the coaches walked the
servants with lighted torches, and the whole procession was wonderfully
impressive.  lord canterville was the chief mourner, having come up
specially from wales to attend the funeral, and sat in the first carriage
along with little virginia.  then came the united states minister and his
wife, then washington and the three boys, and in the last carriage was
mrs. umney.  it was generally felt that, as she had been frightened by
the ghost for more than fifty years of her life, she had a right to see
the last of him.  a deep grave had been dug in the corner of the
churchyard, just under the old yew-tree, and the service was read in the
most impressive manner by the rev. augustus dampier.  when the ceremony
was over, the servants, according to an old custom observed in the
canterville family, extinguished their torches, and, as the coffin was
being lowered into the grave, virginia stepped forward and laid on it a
large cross made of white and pink almond-blossoms.  as she did so, the
moon came out from behind a cloud, and flooded with its silent silver the
little churchyard, and from a distant copse a nightingale began to sing.
she thought of the ghost’s description of the garden of death, her eyes
became dim with tears, and she hardly spoke a word during the drive home.

the next morning, before lord canterville went up to town, mr. otis had
an interview with him on the subject of the jewels the ghost had given to
virginia.  they were perfectly magnificent, especially a certain ruby
necklace with old venetian setting, which was really a superb specimen of
sixteenth-century work, and their value was so great that mr. otis felt
considerable scruples about allowing his daughter to accept them.

‘my lord,’ he said, ‘i know that in this country mortmain is held to
apply to trinkets as well as to land, and it is quite clear to me that
these jewels are, or should be, heirlooms in your family.  i must beg
you, accordingly, to take them to london with you, and to regard them
simply as a portion of your property which has been restored to you under
certain strange conditions.  as for my daughter, she is merely a child,
and has as yet, i am glad to say, but little interest in such
appurtenances of idle luxury.  i am also informed by mrs. otis, who, i
may say, is no mean authority upon art—having had the privilege of
spending several winters in boston when she was a girl—that these gems
are of great monetary worth, and if offered for sale would fetch a tall
price.  under these circumstances, lord canterville, i feel sure that you
will recognise how impossible it would be for me to allow them to remain
in the possession of any member of my family; and, indeed, all such vain
gauds and toys, however suitable or necessary to the dignity of the
british aristocracy, would be completely out of place among those who
have been brought up on the severe, and i believe immortal, principles of
republican simplicity.  perhaps i should mention that virginia is very
anxious that you should allow her to retain the box as a memento of your
unfortunate but misguided ancestor.  as it is extremely old, and
consequently a good deal out of repair, you may perhaps think fit to
comply with her request.  for my own part, i confess i am a good deal
surprised to find a child of mine expressing sympathy with mediævalism in
any form, and can only account for it by the fact that virginia was born
in one of your london suburbs shortly after mrs. otis had returned from a
trip to athens.’

lord canterville listened very gravely to the worthy minister’s speech,
pulling his grey moustache now and then to hide an involuntary smile, and
when mr. otis had ended, he shook him cordially by the hand, and said,
‘my dear sir, your charming little daughter rendered my unlucky ancestor,
sir simon, a very important service, and i and my family are much
indebted to her for her marvellous courage and pluck.  the jewels are
clearly hers, and, egad, i believe that if i were heartless enough to
take them from her, the wicked old fellow would be out of his grave in a
fortnight, leading me the devil of a life.  as for their being heirlooms,
nothing is an heirloom that is not so mentioned in a will or legal
document, and the existence of these jewels has been quite unknown.  i
assure you i have no more claim on them than your butler, and when miss
virginia grows up i daresay she will be pleased to have pretty things to
wear.  besides, you forget, mr. otis, that you took the furniture and the
ghost at a valuation, and anything that belonged to the ghost passed at
once into your possession, as, whatever activity sir simon may have shown
in the corridor at night, in point of law he was really dead, and you
acquired his property by purchase.’

mr. otis was a good deal distressed at lord canterville’s refusal, and
begged him to reconsider his decision, but the good-natured peer was
quite firm, and finally induced the minister to allow his daughter to
retain the present the ghost had given her, and when, in the spring of
1890, the young duchess of cheshire was presented at the queen’s first
drawing-room on the occasion of her marriage, her jewels were the
universal theme of admiration.  for virginia received the coronet, which
is the reward of all good little american girls, and was married to her
boy-lover as soon as he came of age.  they were both so charming, and
they loved each other so much, that every one was delighted at the match,
except the old marchioness of dumbleton, who had tried to catch the duke
for one of her seven unmarried daughters, and had given no less than
three expensive dinner-parties for that purpose, and, strange to say, mr.
otis himself.  mr. otis was extremely fond of the young duke personally,
but, theoretically, he objected to titles, and, to use his own words,
‘was not without apprehension lest, amid the enervating influences of a
pleasure-loving aristocracy, the true principles of republican simplicity
should be forgotten.’  his objections, however, were completely
overruled, and i believe that when he walked up the aisle of st.
george’s, hanover square, with his daughter leaning on his arm, there was
not a prouder man in the whole length and breadth of england.

the duke and duchess, after the honeymoon was over, went down to
canterville chase, and on the day after their arrival they walked over in
the afternoon to the lonely churchyard by the pine-woods.  there had been
a great deal of difficulty at first about the inscription on sir simon’s
tombstone, but finally it had been decided to engrave on it simply the
initials of the old gentleman’s name, and the verse from the library
window.  the duchess had brought with her some lovely roses, which she
strewed upon the grave, and after they had stood by it for some time they
strolled into the ruined chancel of the old abbey.  there the duchess sat
down on a fallen pillar, while her husband lay at her feet smoking a
cigarette and looking up at her beautiful eyes.  suddenly he threw his
cigarette away, took hold of her hand, and said to her, ‘virginia, a wife
should have no secrets from her husband.’

‘dear cecil!  i have no secrets from you.’

‘yes, you have,’ he answered, smiling, ‘you have never told me what
happened to you when you were locked up with the ghost.’

‘i have never told any one, cecil,’ said virginia gravely.

‘i know that, but you might tell me.’

‘please don’t ask me, cecil, i cannot tell you.  poor sir simon!  i owe
him a great deal.  yes, don’t laugh, cecil, i really do.  he made me see
what life is, and what death signifies, and why love is stronger than
both.’

the duke rose and kissed his wife lovingly.

‘you can have your secret as long as i have your heart,’ he murmured.

‘you have always had that, cecil.’

‘and you will tell our children some day, won’t you?’

virginia blushed.




the sphinx without a secret
an etching


one afternoon i was sitting outside the café de la paix, watching the
splendour and shabbiness of parisian life, and wondering over my vermouth
at the strange panorama of pride and poverty that was passing before me,
when i heard some one call my name.  i turned round, and saw lord
murchison.  we had not met since we had been at college together, nearly
ten years before, so i was delighted to come across him again, and we
shook hands warmly.  at oxford we had been great friends.  i had liked
him immensely, he was so handsome, so high-spirited, and so honourable.
we used to say of him that he would be the best of fellows, if he did not
always speak the truth, but i think we really admired him all the more
for his frankness.  i found him a good deal changed.  he looked anxious
and puzzled, and seemed to be in doubt about something.  i felt it could
not be modern scepticism, for murchison was the stoutest of tories, and
believed in the pentateuch as firmly as he believed in the house of
peers; so i concluded that it was a woman, and asked him if he was
married yet.

‘i don’t understand women well enough,’ he answered.

‘my dear gerald,’ i said, ‘women are meant to be loved, not to be
understood.’

‘i cannot love where i cannot trust,’ he replied.

‘i believe you have a mystery in your life, gerald,’ i exclaimed; ‘tell
me about it.’

‘let us go for a drive,’ he answered, ‘it is too crowded here.  no, not a
yellow carriage, any other colour—there, that dark green one will do’;
and in a few moments we were trotting down the boulevard in the direction
of the madeleine.

‘where shall we go to?’ i said.

‘oh, anywhere you like!’ he answered—‘to the restaurant in the bois; we
will dine there, and you shall tell me all about yourself.’

‘i want to hear about you first,’ i said.  ‘tell me your mystery.’

he took from his pocket a little silver-clasped morocco case, and handed
it to me.  i opened it.  inside there was the photograph of a woman.  she
was tall and slight, and strangely picturesque with her large vague eyes
and loosened hair.  she looked like a _clairvoyante_, and was wrapped in
rich furs.

‘what do you think of that face?’ he said; ‘is it truthful?’

i examined it carefully.  it seemed to me the face of some one who had a
secret, but whether that secret was good or evil i could not say.  its
beauty was a beauty moulded out of many mysteries—the beauty, in fact,
which is psychological, not plastic—and the faint smile that just played
across the lips was far too subtle to be really sweet.

‘well,’ he cried impatiently, ‘what do you say?’

‘she is the gioconda in sables,’ i answered.  ‘let me know all about
her.’

‘not now,’ he said; ‘after dinner,’ and began to talk of other things.

when the waiter brought us our coffee and cigarettes i reminded gerald of
his promise.  he rose from his seat, walked two or three times up and
down the room, and, sinking into an armchair, told me the following
story:—

‘one evening,’ he said, ‘i was walking down bond street about five
o’clock.  there was a terrific crush of carriages, and the traffic was
almost stopped.  close to the pavement was standing a little yellow
brougham, which, for some reason or other, attracted my attention.  as i
passed by there looked out from it the face i showed you this afternoon.
it fascinated me immediately.  all that night i kept thinking of it, and
all the next day.  i wandered up and down that wretched row, peering into
every carriage, and waiting for the yellow brougham; but i could not find
_ma belle inconnue_, and at last i began to think she was merely a dream.
about a week afterwards i was dining with madame de rastail.  dinner was
for eight o’clock; but at half-past eight we were still waiting in the
drawing-room.  finally the servant threw open the door, and announced
lady alroy.  it was the woman i had been looking for.  she came in very
slowly, looking like a moonbeam in grey lace, and, to my intense delight,
i was asked to take her in to dinner.  after we had sat down, i remarked
quite innocently, “i think i caught sight of you in bond street some time
ago, lady alroy.”  she grew very pale, and said to me in a low voice,
“pray do not talk so loud; you may be overheard.”  i felt miserable at
having made such a bad beginning, and plunged recklessly into the subject
of the french plays.  she spoke very little, always in the same low
musical voice, and seemed as if she was afraid of some one listening.  i
fell passionately, stupidly in love, and the indefinable atmosphere of
mystery that surrounded her excited my most ardent curiosity.  when she
was going away, which she did very soon after dinner, i asked her if i
might call and see her.  she hesitated for a moment, glanced round to see
if any one was near us, and then said, “yes; to-morrow at a quarter to
five.”  i begged madame de rastail to tell me about her; but all that i
could learn was that she was a widow with a beautiful house in park lane,
and as some scientific bore began a dissertation on widows, as
exemplifying the survival of the matrimonially fittest, i left and went
home.

‘the next day i arrived at park lane punctual to the moment, but was told
by the butler that lady alroy had just gone out.  i went down to the club
quite unhappy and very much puzzled, and after long consideration wrote
her a letter, asking if i might be allowed to try my chance some other
afternoon.  i had no answer for several days, but at last i got a little
note saying she would be at home on sunday at four and with this
extraordinary postscript: “please do not write to me here again; i will
explain when i see you.”  on sunday she received me, and was perfectly
charming; but when i was going away she begged of me, if i ever had
occasion to write to her again, to address my letter to “mrs. knox, care
of whittaker’s library, green street.”  “there are reasons,” she said,
“why i cannot receive letters in my own house.”

‘all through the season i saw a great deal of her, and the atmosphere of
mystery never left her.  sometimes i thought that she was in the power of
some man, but she looked so unapproachable, that i could not believe it.
it was really very difficult for me to come to any conclusion, for she
was like one of those strange crystals that one sees in museums, which
are at one moment clear, and at another clouded.  at last i determined to
ask her to be my wife: i was sick and tired of the incessant secrecy that
she imposed on all my visits, and on the few letters i sent her.  i wrote
to her at the library to ask her if she could see me the following monday
at six.  she answered yes, and i was in the seventh heaven of delight.  i
was infatuated with her: in spite of the mystery, i thought then—in
consequence of it, i see now.  no; it was the woman herself i loved.  the
mystery troubled me, maddened me.  why did chance put me in its track?’

‘you discovered it, then?’ i cried.

‘i fear so,’ he answered.  ‘you can judge for yourself.’

‘when monday came round i went to lunch with my uncle, and about four
o’clock found myself in the marylebone road.  my uncle, you know, lives
in regent’s park.  i wanted to get to piccadilly, and took a short cut
through a lot of shabby little streets.  suddenly i saw in front of me
lady alroy, deeply veiled and walking very fast.  on coming to the last
house in the street, she went up the steps, took out a latch-key, and let
herself in.  “here is the mystery,” i said to myself; and i hurried on
and examined the house.  it seemed a sort of place for letting lodgings.
on the doorstep lay her handkerchief, which she had dropped.  i picked it
up and put it in my pocket.  then i began to consider what i should do.
i came to the conclusion that i had no right to spy on her, and i drove
down to the club.  at six i called to see her.  she was lying on a sofa,
in a tea-gown of silver tissue looped up by some strange moonstones that
she always wore.  she was looking quite lovely.  “i am so glad to see
you,” she said; “i have not been out all day.”  i stared at her in
amazement, and pulling the handkerchief out of my pocket, handed it to
her.  “you dropped this in cumnor street this afternoon, lady alroy,”  i
said very calmly.  she looked at me in terror but made no attempt to take
the handkerchief.  “what were you doing there?” i asked.  “what right
have you to question me?” she answered.  “the right of a man who loves
you,” i replied; “i came here to ask you to be my wife.”  she hid her
face in her hands, and burst into floods of tears.  “you must tell me,” i
continued.  she stood up, and, looking me straight in the face, said,
“lord murchison, there is nothing to tell you.”—“you went to meet some
one,” i cried; “this is your mystery.”  she grew dreadfully white, and
said, “i went to meet no one.”—“can’t you tell the truth?” i exclaimed.
“i have told it,” she replied.  i was mad, frantic; i don’t know what i
said, but i said terrible things to her.  finally i rushed out of the
house.  she wrote me a letter the next day; i sent it back unopened, and
started for norway with alan colville.  after a month i came back, and
the first thing i saw in the _morning post_ was the death of lady alroy.
she had caught a chill at the opera, and had died in five days of
congestion of the lungs.  i shut myself up and saw no one.  i had loved
her so much, i had loved her so madly.  good god! how i had loved that
woman!’

‘you went to the street, to the house in it?’ i said.

‘yes,’ he answered.

‘one day i went to cumnor street.  i could not help it; i was tortured
with doubt.  i knocked at the door, and a respectable-looking woman
opened it to me.  i asked her if she had any rooms to let.  “well, sir,”
she replied, “the drawing-rooms are supposed to be let; but i have not
seen the lady for three months, and as rent is owing on them, you can
have them.”—“is this the lady?” i said, showing the photograph.  “that’s
her, sure enough,” she exclaimed; “and when is she coming back,
sir?”—“the lady is dead,” i replied.  “oh sir, i hope not!” said the
woman; “she was my best lodger.  she paid me three guineas a week merely
to sit in my drawing-rooms now and then.”  “she met some one here?” i
said; but the woman assured me that it was not so, that she always came
alone, and saw no one.  “what on earth did she do here?” i cried.  “she
simply sat in the drawing-room, sir, reading books, and sometimes had
tea,” the woman answered.  i did not know what to say, so i gave her a
sovereign and went away.  now, what do you think it all meant?  you don’t
believe the woman was telling the truth?’

‘i do.’

‘then why did lady alroy go there?’

‘my dear gerald,’ i answered, ‘lady alroy was simply a woman with a mania
for mystery.  she took these rooms for the pleasure of going there with
her veil down, and imagining she was a heroine.  she had a passion for
secrecy, but she herself was merely a sphinx without a secret.’

‘do you really think so?’

‘i am sure of it,’ i replied.

he took out the morocco case, opened it, and looked at the photograph.
‘i wonder?’ he said at last.




the model millionaire
a note of admiration


unless one is wealthy there is no use in being a charming fellow.
romance is the privilege of the rich, not the profession of the
unemployed.  the poor should be practical and prosaic.  it is better to
have a permanent income than to be fascinating.  these are the great
truths of modern life which hughie erskine never realised.  poor hughie!
intellectually, we must admit, he was not of much importance.  he never
said a brilliant or even an ill-natured thing in his life.  but then he
was wonderfully good-looking, with his crisp brown hair, his clear-cut
profile, and his grey eyes.  he was as popular with men as he was with
women and he had every accomplishment except that of making money.  his
father had bequeathed him his cavalry sword and a _history of the
peninsular war_ in fifteen volumes.  hughie hung the first over his
looking-glass, put the second on a shelf between _ruff’s guide_ and
_bailey’s magazine_, and lived on two hundred a year that an old aunt
allowed him.  he had tried everything.  he had gone on the stock exchange
for six months; but what was a butterfly to do among bulls and bears?  he
had been a tea-merchant for a little longer, but had soon tired of pekoe
and souchong.  then he had tried selling dry sherry.  that did not
answer; the sherry was a little too dry.  ultimately he became nothing, a
delightful, ineffectual young man with a perfect profile and no
profession.

to make matters worse, he was in love.  the girl he loved was laura
merton, the daughter of a retired colonel who had lost his temper and his
digestion in india, and had never found either of them again.  laura
adored him, and he was ready to kiss her shoe-strings.  they were the
handsomest couple in london, and had not a penny-piece between them.  the
colonel was very fond of hughie, but would not hear of any engagement.

‘come to me, my boy, when you have got ten thousand pounds of your own,
and we will see about it,’ he used to say; and hughie looked very glum in
those days, and had to go to laura for consolation.

one morning, as he was on his way to holland park, where the mertons
lived, he dropped in to see a great friend of his, alan trevor.  trevor
was a painter.  indeed, few people escape that nowadays.  but he was also
an artist, and artists are rather rare.  personally he was a strange
rough fellow, with a freckled face and a red ragged beard.  however, when
he took up the brush he was a real master, and his pictures were eagerly
sought after.  he had been very much attracted by hughie at first, it
must be acknowledged, entirely on account of his personal charm.  ‘the
only people a painter should know,’ he used to say, ‘are people who are
_bête_ and beautiful, people who are an artistic pleasure to look at and
an intellectual repose to talk to.  men who are dandies and women who are
darlings rule the world, at least they should do so.’  however, after he
got to know hughie better, he liked him quite as much for his bright,
buoyant spirits and his generous, reckless nature, and had given him the
permanent _entrée_ to his studio.

when hughie came in he found trevor putting the finishing touches to a
wonderful life-size picture of a beggar-man.  the beggar himself was
standing on a raised platform in a corner of the studio.  he was a
wizened old man, with a face like wrinkled parchment, and a most piteous
expression.  over his shoulders was flung a coarse brown cloak, all tears
and tatters; his thick boots were patched and cobbled, and with one hand
he leant on a rough stick, while with the other he held out his battered
hat for alms.

‘what an amazing model!’ whispered hughie, as he shook hands with his
friend.

‘an amazing model?’ shouted trevor at the top of his voice; ‘i should
think so!  such beggars as he are not to be met with every day.  a
_trouvaille_, _mon cher_; a living velasquez!  my stars! what an etching
rembrandt would have made of him!’

‘poor old chap!’ said hughie, ‘how miserable he looks!  but i suppose, to
you painters, his face is his fortune?’

‘certainly,’ replied trevor, ‘you don’t want a beggar to look happy, do
you?’

‘how much does a model get for sitting?’ asked hughie, as he found
himself a comfortable seat on a divan.

‘a shilling an hour.’

‘and how much do you get for your picture, alan?’

‘oh, for this i get two thousand!’

‘pounds?’

‘guineas.  painters, poets, and physicians always get guineas.’

‘well, i think the model should have a percentage,’ cried hughie,
laughing; ‘they work quite as hard as you do.’

‘nonsense, nonsense!  why, look at the trouble of laying on the paint
alone, and standing all day long at one’s easel!  it’s all very well,
hughie, for you to talk, but i assure you that there are moments when art
almost attains to the dignity of manual labour.  but you mustn’t chatter;
i’m very busy.  smoke a cigarette, and keep quiet.’

after some time the servant came in, and told trevor that the framemaker
wanted to speak to him.

‘don’t run away, hughie,’ he said, as he went out, ‘i will be back in a
moment.’

the old beggar-man took advantage of trevor’s absence to rest for a
moment on a wooden bench that was behind him.  he looked so forlorn and
wretched that hughie could not help pitying him, and felt in his pockets
to see what money he had.  all he could find was a sovereign and some
coppers.  ‘poor old fellow,’ he thought to himself, ‘he wants it more
than i do, but it means no hansoms for a fortnight’; and he walked across
the studio and slipped the sovereign into the beggar’s hand.

the old man started, and a faint smile flitted across his withered lips.
‘thank you, sir,’ he said, ‘thank you.’

then trevor arrived, and hughie took his leave, blushing a little at what
he had done.  he spent the day with laura, got a charming scolding for
his extravagance, and had to walk home.

that night he strolled into the palette club about eleven o’clock, and
found trevor sitting by himself in the smoking-room drinking hock and
seltzer.

‘well, alan, did you get the picture finished all right?’ he said, as he
lit his cigarette.

‘finished and framed, my boy!’ answered trevor; ‘and, by the bye, you
have made a conquest.  that old model you saw is quite devoted to you.  i
had to tell him all about you—who you are, where you live, what your
income is, what prospects you have—’

‘my dear alan,’ cried hughie, ‘i shall probably find him waiting for me
when i go home.  but of course you are only joking.  poor old wretch!  i
wish i could do something for him.  i think it is dreadful that any one
should be so miserable.  i have got heaps of old clothes at home—do you
think he would care for any of them?  why, his rags were falling to
bits.’

‘but he looks splendid in them,’ said trevor.  ‘i wouldn’t paint him in a
frock coat for anything.  what you call rags i call romance.  what seems
poverty to you is picturesqueness to me.  however, i’ll tell him of your
offer.’

‘alan,’ said hughie seriously, ‘you painters are a heartless lot.’

‘an artist’s heart is his head,’ replied trevor; ‘and besides, our
business is to realise the world as we see it, not to reform it as we
know it.  _à chacun son métier_.  and now tell me how laura is.  the old
model was quite interested in her.’

‘you don’t mean to say you talked to him about her?’ said hughie.

‘certainly i did.  he knows all about the relentless colonel, the lovely
laura, and the £10,000.’

‘you told that old beggar all my private affairs?’ cried hughie, looking
very red and angry.

‘my dear boy,’ said trevor, smiling, ‘that old beggar, as you call him,
is one of the richest men in europe.  he could buy all london to-morrow
without overdrawing his account.  he has a house in every capital, dines
off gold plate, and can prevent russia going to war when he chooses.’

‘what on earth do you mean?’ exclaimed hughie.

‘what i say,’ said trevor.  ‘the old man you saw to-day in the studio was
baron hausberg.  he is a great friend of mine, buys all my pictures and
that sort of thing, and gave me a commission a month ago to paint him as
a beggar.  _que voulez-vous_?  _la fantaisie d’un millionnaire_!  and i
must say he made a magnificent figure in his rags, or perhaps i should
say in my rags; they are an old suit i got in spain.’

‘baron hausberg!’ cried hughie.  ‘good heavens!  i gave him a sovereign!’
and he sank into an armchair the picture of dismay.

‘gave him a sovereign!’ shouted trevor, and he burst into a roar of
laughter.  ‘my dear boy, you’ll never see it again.  _son affaire c’est
l’argent des autres_.’

‘i think you might have told me, alan,’ said hughie sulkily, ‘and not
have let me make such a fool of myself.’

‘well, to begin with, hughie,’ said trevor, ‘it never entered my mind
that you went about distributing alms in that reckless way.  i can
understand your kissing a pretty model, but your giving a sovereign to an
ugly one—by jove, no!  besides, the fact is that i really was not at home
to-day to any one; and when you came in i didn’t know whether hausberg
would like his name mentioned.  you know he wasn’t in full dress.’

‘what a duffer he must think me!’ said hughie.

‘not at all.  he was in the highest spirits after you left; kept
chuckling to himself and rubbing his old wrinkled hands together.  i
couldn’t make out why he was so interested to know all about you; but i
see it all now.  he’ll invest your sovereign for you, hughie, pay you the
interest every six months, and have a capital story to tell after
dinner.’

‘i am an unlucky devil,’ growled hughie.  ‘the best thing i can do is to
go to bed; and, my dear alan, you mustn’t tell any one.  i shouldn’t dare
show my face in the row.’

‘nonsense!  it reflects the highest credit on your philanthropic spirit,
hughie.  and don’t run away.  have another cigarette, and you can talk
about laura as much as you like.’

however, hughie wouldn’t stop, but walked home, feeling very unhappy, and
leaving alan trevor in fits of laughter.

the next morning, as he was at breakfast, the servant brought him up a
card on which was written, ‘monsieur gustave naudin, _de la part de_ m.
le baron hausberg.’  ‘i suppose he has come for an apology,’ said hughie
to himself; and he told the servant to show the visitor up.

an old gentleman with gold spectacles and grey hair came into the room,
and said, in a slight french accent, ‘have i the honour of addressing
monsieur erskine?’

hughie bowed.

‘i have come from baron hausberg,’ he continued.  ‘the baron—’

‘i beg, sir, that you will offer him my sincerest apologies,’ stammered
hughie.

‘the baron,’ said the old gentleman with a smile, ‘has commissioned me to
bring you this letter’; and he extended a sealed envelope.

on the outside was written, ‘a wedding present to hugh erskine and laura
merton, from an old beggar,’ and inside was a cheque for £10,000.

when they were married alan trevor was the best man, and the baron made a
speech at the wedding breakfast.

‘millionaire models,’ remarked alan, ‘are rare enough; but, by jove,
model millionaires are rarer still!’




the portrait of mr. w. h.


chapter i


i had been dining with erskine in his pretty little house in birdcage
walk, and we were sitting in the library over our coffee and cigarettes,
when the question of literary forgeries happened to turn up in
conversation.  i cannot at present remember how it was that we struck
upon this somewhat curious topic, as it was at that time, but i know that
we had a long discussion about macpherson, ireland, and chatterton, and
that with regard to the last i insisted that his so-called forgeries were
merely the result of an artistic desire for perfect representation; that
we had no right to quarrel with an artist for the conditions under which
he chooses to present his work; and that all art being to a certain
degree a mode of acting, an attempt to realise one’s own personality on
some imaginative plane out of reach of the trammelling accidents and
limitations of real life, to censure an artist for a forgery was to
confuse an ethical with an æsthetical problem.

erskine, who was a good deal older than i was, and had been listening to
me with the amused deference of a man of forty, suddenly put his hand
upon my shoulder and said to me, ‘what would you say about a young man
who had a strange theory about a certain work of art, believed in his
theory, and committed a forgery in order to prove it?’

‘ah! that is quite a different matter,’ i answered.

erskine remained silent for a few moments, looking at the thin grey
threads of smoke that were rising from his cigarette.  ‘yes,’ he said,
after a pause, ‘quite different.’

there was something in the tone of his voice, a slight touch of
bitterness perhaps, that excited my curiosity.  ‘did you ever know
anybody who did that?’ i cried.

‘yes,’ he answered, throwing his cigarette into the fire,—‘a great friend
of mine, cyril graham.  he was very fascinating, and very foolish, and
very heartless.  however, he left me the only legacy i ever received in
my life.’

‘what was that?’ i exclaimed.  erskine rose from his seat, and going over
to a tall inlaid cabinet that stood between the two windows, unlocked it,
and came back to where i was sitting, holding in his hand a small panel
picture set in an old and somewhat tarnished elizabethan frame.

it was a full-length portrait of a young man in late sixteenth-century
costume, standing by a table, with his right hand resting on an open
book.  he seemed about seventeen years of age, and was of quite
extraordinary personal beauty, though evidently somewhat effeminate.
indeed, had it not been for the dress and the closely cropped hair, one
would have said that the face with its dreamy wistful eyes, and its
delicate scarlet lips, was the face of a girl.  in manner, and especially
in the treatment of the hands, the picture reminded one of françois
clouet’s later work.  the black velvet doublet with its fantastically
gilded points, and the peacock-blue background against which it showed up
so pleasantly, and from which it gained such luminous value of colour,
were quite in clouet’s style; and the two masks of tragedy and comedy
that hung somewhat formally from the marble pedestal had that hard
severity of touch—so different from the facile grace of the
italians—which even at the court of france the great flemish master never
completely lost, and which in itself has always been a characteristic of
the northern temper.

‘it is a charming thing,’ i cried, ‘but who is this wonderful young man,
whose beauty art has so happily preserved for us?’

‘this is the portrait of mr. w. h.,’ said erskine, with a sad smile.  it
might have been a chance effect of light, but it seemed to me that his
eyes were quite bright with tears.

‘mr. w. h.!’ i exclaimed; ‘who was mr. w. h.?’

‘don’t you remember?’ he answered; ‘look at the book on which his hand is
resting.’

‘i see there is some writing there, but i cannot make it out,’ i replied.

‘take this magnifying-glass and try,’ said erskine, with the same sad
smile still playing about his mouth.

i took the glass, and moving the lamp a little nearer, i began to spell
out the crabbed sixteenth-century handwriting.  ‘to the onlie begetter of
these insuing sonnets.’ . . . ‘good heavens!’ i cried, ‘is this
shakespeare’s mr. w. h.?’

‘cyril graham used to say so,’ muttered erskine.

‘but it is not a bit like lord pembroke,’ i answered.  ‘i know the
penshurst portraits very well.  i was staying near there a few weeks
ago.’

‘do you really believe then that the sonnets are addressed to lord
pembroke?’ he asked.

‘i am sure of it,’ i answered.  ‘pembroke, shakespeare, and mrs. mary
fitton are the three personages of the sonnets; there is no doubt at all
about it.’

‘well, i agree with you,’ said erskine, ‘but i did not always think so.
i used to believe—well, i suppose i used to believe in cyril graham and
his theory.’

‘and what was that?’ i asked, looking at the wonderful portrait, which
had already begun to have a strange fascination for me.

‘it is a long story,’ said erskine, taking the picture away from
me—rather abruptly i thought at the time—‘a very long story; but if you
care to hear it, i will tell it to you.’

‘i love theories about the sonnets,’ i cried; ‘but i don’t think i am
likely to be converted to any new idea.  the matter has ceased to be a
mystery to any one.  indeed, i wonder that it ever was a mystery.’

‘as i don’t believe in the theory, i am not likely to convert you to it,’
said erskine, laughing; ‘but it may interest you.’

‘tell it to me, of course,’ i answered.  ‘if it is half as delightful as
the picture, i shall be more than satisfied.’

‘well,’ said erskine, lighting a cigarette, ‘i must begin by telling you
about cyril graham himself.  he and i were at the same house at eton.  i
was a year or two older than he was, but we were immense friends, and did
all our work and all our play together.  there was, of course, a good
deal more play than work, but i cannot say that i am sorry for that.  it
is always an advantage not to have received a sound commercial education,
and what i learned in the playing fields at eton has been quite as useful
to me as anything i was taught at cambridge.  i should tell you that
cyril’s father and mother were both dead.  they had been drowned in a
horrible yachting accident off the isle of wight.  his father had been in
the diplomatic service, and had married a daughter, the only daughter, in
fact, of old lord crediton, who became cyril’s guardian after the death
of his parents.  i don’t think that lord crediton cared very much for
cyril.  he had never really forgiven his daughter for marrying a man who
had not a title.  he was an extraordinary old aristocrat, who swore like
a costermonger, and had the manners of a farmer.  i remember seeing him
once on speech-day.  he growled at me, gave me a sovereign, and told me
not to grow up “a damned radical” like my father.  cyril had very little
affection for him, and was only too glad to spend most of his holidays
with us in scotland.  they never really got on together at all.  cyril
thought him a bear, and he thought cyril effeminate.  he was effeminate,
i suppose, in some things, though he was a very good rider and a capital
fencer.  in fact he got the foils before he left eton.  but he was very
languid in his manner, and not a little vain of his good looks, and had a
strong objection to football.  the two things that really gave him
pleasure were poetry and acting.  at eton he was always dressing up and
reciting shakespeare, and when we went up to trinity he became a member
of the a.d.c. his first term.  i remember i was always very jealous of
his acting.  i was absurdly devoted to him; i suppose because we were so
different in some things.  i was a rather awkward, weakly lad, with huge
feet, and horribly freckled.  freckles run in scotch families just as
gout does in english families.  cyril used to say that of the two he
preferred the gout; but he always set an absurdly high value on personal
appearance, and once read a paper before our debating society to prove
that it was better to be good-looking than to be good.  he certainly was
wonderfully handsome.  people who did not like him, philistines and
college tutors, and young men reading for the church, used to say that he
was merely pretty; but there was a great deal more in his face than mere
prettiness.  i think he was the most splendid creature i ever saw, and
nothing could exceed the grace of his movements, the charm of his manner.
he fascinated everybody who was worth fascinating, and a great many
people who were not.  he was often wilful and petulant, and i used to
think him dreadfully insincere.  it was due, i think, chiefly to his
inordinate desire to please.  poor cyril!  i told him once that he was
contented with very cheap triumphs, but he only laughed.  he was horribly
spoiled.  all charming people, i fancy, are spoiled.  it is the secret of
their attraction.

‘however, i must tell you about cyril’s acting.  you know that no
actresses are allowed to play at the a.d.c.  at least they were not in my
time.  i don’t know how it is now.  well, of course, cyril was always
cast for the girls’ parts, and when _as you like it_ was produced he
played rosalind.  it was a marvellous performance.  in fact, cyril graham
was the only perfect rosalind i have ever seen.  it would be impossible
to describe to you the beauty, the delicacy, the refinement of the whole
thing.  it made an immense sensation, and the horrid little theatre, as
it was then, was crowded every night.  even when i read the play now i
can’t help thinking of cyril.  it might have been written for him.  the
next term he took his degree, and came to london to read for the
diplomatic.  but he never did any work.  he spent his days in reading
shakespeare’s sonnets, and his evenings at the theatre.  he was, of
course, wild to go on the stage.  it was all that i and lord crediton
could do to prevent him.  perhaps if he had gone on the stage he would be
alive now.  it is always a silly thing to give advice, but to give good
advice is absolutely fatal.  i hope you will never fall into that error.
if you do, you will be sorry for it.

‘well, to come to the real point of the story, one day i got a letter
from cyril asking me to come round to his rooms that evening.  he had
charming chambers in piccadilly overlooking the green park, and as i used
to go to see him every day, i was rather surprised at his taking the
trouble to write.  of course i went, and when i arrived i found him in a
state of great excitement.  he told me that he had at last discovered the
true secret of shakespeare’s sonnets; that all the scholars and critics
had been entirely on the wrong tack; and that he was the first who,
working purely by internal evidence, had found out who mr. w. h. really
was.  he was perfectly wild with delight, and for a long time would not
tell me his theory.  finally, he produced a bundle of notes, took his
copy of the sonnets off the mantelpiece, and sat down and gave me a long
lecture on the whole subject.

‘he began by pointing out that the young man to whom shakespeare
addressed these strangely passionate poems must have been somebody who
was a really vital factor in the development of his dramatic art, and
that this could not be said either of lord pembroke or lord southampton.
indeed, whoever he was, he could not have been anybody of high birth, as
was shown very clearly by the 25th sonnet, in which shakespeare
contrasting himself with those who are “great princes’ favourites,” says
quite frankly—

    let those who are in favour with their stars
    of public honour and proud titles boast,
    whilst i, whom fortune of such triumph bars,
    unlook’d for joy in that i honour most.

and ends the sonnet by congratulating himself on the mean state of him he
so adored.

    then happy i, that love and am beloved
    where i may not remove nor be removed.

this sonnet cyril declared would be quite unintelligible if we fancied
that it was addressed to either the earl of pembroke or the earl of
southampton, both of whom were men of the highest position in england and
fully entitled to be called “great princes”; and he in corroboration of
his view read me sonnets cxxiv. and cxxv., in which shakespeare tells us
that his love is not “the child of state,” that it “suffers not in
smiling pomp,” but is “builded far from accident.”  i listened with a
good deal of interest, for i don’t think the point had ever been made
before; but what followed was still more curious, and seemed to me at the
time to dispose entirely of pembroke’s claim.  we know from meres that
the sonnets had been written before 1598, and sonnet civ. informs us that
shakespeare’s friendship for mr. w. h. had been already in existence for
three years.  now lord pembroke, who was born in 1580, did not come to
london till he was eighteen years of age, that is to say till 1598, and
shakespeare’s acquaintance with mr. w. h. must have begun in 1594, or at
the latest in 1595.  shakespeare, accordingly, could not have known lord
pembroke till after the sonnets had been written.

‘cyril pointed out also that pembroke’s father did not die till 1601;
whereas it was evident from the line,

    you had a father; let your son say so,

that the father of mr. w. h. was dead in 1598.  besides, it was absurd to
imagine that any publisher of the time, and the preface is from the
publisher’s hand, would have ventured to address william herbert, earl of
pembroke, as mr. w. h.; the case of lord buckhurst being spoken of as mr.
sackville being not really a parallel instance, as lord buckhurst was not
a peer, but merely the younger son of a peer, with a courtesy title, and
the passage in _england’s parnassus_, where he is so spoken of, is not a
formal and stately dedication, but simply a casual allusion.  so far for
lord pembroke, whose supposed claims cyril easily demolished while i sat
by in wonder.  with lord southampton cyril had even less difficulty.
southampton became at a very early age the lover of elizabeth vernon, so
he needed no entreaties to marry; he was not beautiful; he did not
resemble his mother, as mr. w. h. did—

    thou art thy mother’s glass, and she in thee
    calls back the lovely april of her prime;

and, above all, his christian name was henry, whereas the punning sonnets
(cxxxv. and cxliii.) show that the christian name of shakespeare’s friend
was the same as his own—_will_.

‘as for the other suggestions of unfortunate commentators, that mr. w. h.
is a misprint for mr. w. s., meaning mr. william shakespeare; that “mr.
w. h. all” should be read “mr. w. hall”; that mr. w. h. is mr. william
hathaway; and that a full stop should be placed after “wisheth,” making
mr. w. h. the writer and not the subject of the dedication,—cyril got rid
of them in a very short time; and it is not worth while to mention his
reasons, though i remember he sent me off into a fit of laughter by
reading to me, i am glad to say not in the original, some extracts from a
german commentator called barnstorff, who insisted that mr. w. h. was no
less a person than “mr. william himself.”  nor would he allow for a
moment that the sonnets are mere satires on the work of drayton and john
davies of hereford.  to him, as indeed to me, they were poems of serious
and tragic import, wrung out of the bitterness of shakespeare’s heart,
and made sweet by the honey of his lips.  still less would he admit that
they were merely a philosophical allegory, and that in them shakespeare
is addressing his ideal self, or ideal manhood, or the spirit of beauty,
or the reason, or the divine logos, or the catholic church.  he felt, as
indeed i think we all must feel, that the sonnets are addressed to an
individual,—to a particular young man whose personality for some reason
seems to have filled the soul of shakespeare with terrible joy and no
less terrible despair.

‘having in this manner cleared the way as it were, cyril asked me to
dismiss from my mind any preconceived ideas i might have formed on the
subject, and to give a fair and unbiassed hearing to his own theory.  the
problem he pointed out was this: who was that young man of shakespeare’s
day who, without being of noble birth or even of noble nature, was
addressed by him in terms of such passionate adoration that we can but
wonder at the strange worship, and are almost afraid to turn the key that
unlocks the mystery of the poet’s heart?  who was he whose physical
beauty was such that it became the very corner-stone of shakespeare’s
art; the very source of shakespeare’s inspiration; the very incarnation
of shakespeare’s dreams?  to look upon him as simply the object of
certain love-poems is to miss the whole meaning of the poems: for the art
of which shakespeare talks in the sonnets is not the art of the sonnets
themselves, which indeed were to him but slight and secret things—it is
the art of the dramatist to which he is always alluding; and he to whom
shakespeare said—

          thou art all my art, and dost advance
    as high as learning my rude ignorance,

he to whom he promised immortality,

    where breath most breathes, even in the mouths of men,—

was surely none other than the boy-actor for whom he created viola and
imogen, juliet and rosalind, portia and desdemona, and cleopatra herself.
this was cyril graham’s theory, evolved as you see purely from the
sonnets themselves, and depending for its acceptance not so much on
demonstrable proof or formal evidence, but on a kind of spiritual and
artistic sense, by which alone he claimed could the true meaning of the
poems be discerned.  i remember his reading to me that fine sonnet—

    how can my muse want subject to invent,
    while thou dost breathe, that pour’st into my verse
    thine own sweet argument, too excellent
    for every vulgar paper to rehearse?
    o, give thyself the thanks, if aught in me
    worthy perusal stand against thy sight;
    for who’s so dumb that cannot write to thee,
    when thou thyself dost give invention light?
    be thou the tenth muse, ten times more in worth
    than those old nine which rhymers invocate;
    and he that calls on thee, let him bring forth
    eternal numbers to outlive long date—

and pointing out how completely it corroborated his theory; and indeed he
went through all the sonnets carefully, and showed, or fancied that he
showed, that, according to his new explanation of their meaning, things
that had seemed obscure, or evil, or exaggerated, became clear and
rational, and of high artistic import, illustrating shakespeare’s
conception of the true relations between the art of the actor and the art
of the dramatist.

‘it is of course evident that there must have been in shakespeare’s
company some wonderful boy-actor of great beauty, to whom he intrusted
the presentation of his noble heroines; for shakespeare was a practical
theatrical manager as well as an imaginative poet, and cyril graham had
actually discovered the boy-actor’s name.  he was will, or, as he
preferred to call him, willie hughes.  the christian name he found of
course in the punning sonnets, cxxxv. and cxliii.; the surname was,
according to him, hidden in the seventh line of the 20th sonnet, where
mr. w. h. is described as—

    a man in hew, all _hews_ in his controwling.

‘in the original edition of the sonnets “hews” is printed with a capital
letter and in italics, and this, he claimed, showed clearly that a play
on words was intended, his view receiving a good deal of corroboration
from those sonnets in which curious puns are made on the words “use” and
“usury.”  of course i was converted at once, and willie hughes became to
me as real a person as shakespeare.  the only objection i made to the
theory was that the name of willie hughes does not occur in the list of
the actors of shakespeare’s company as it is printed in the first folio.
cyril, however, pointed out that the absence of willie hughes’s name from
this list really corroborated the theory, as it was evident from sonnet
lxxxvi. that willie hughes had abandoned shakespeare’s company to play at
a rival theatre, probably in some of chapman’s plays.  it is in reference
to this that in the great sonnet on chapman, shakespeare said to willie
hughes—

    but when your countenance fill’d up his line,
    then lack’d i matter; that enfeebled mine—

the expression “when your countenance filled up his line” referring
obviously to the beauty of the young actor giving life and reality and
added charm to chapman’s verse, the same idea being also put forward in
the 79th sonnet—

    whilst i alone did call upon thy aid,
    my verse alone had all thy gentle grace;
    but now my gracious numbers are decay’d,
    and my sick muse doth give another place;

and in the immediately preceding sonnet, where shakespeare says—

          every alien pen has got my _use_
    and under thee their poesy disperse,

the play upon words (use=hughes) being of course obvious, and the phrase
“under thee their poesy disperse,” meaning “by your assistance as an
actor bring their plays before the people.”

‘it was a wonderful evening, and we sat up almost till dawn reading and
re-reading the sonnets.  after some time, however, i began to see that
before the theory could be placed before the world in a really perfected
form, it was necessary to get some independent evidence about the
existence of this young actor, willie hughes.  if this could be once
established, there could be no possible doubt about his identity with mr.
w. h.; but otherwise the theory would fall to the ground.  i put this
forward very strongly to cyril, who was a good deal annoyed at what he
called my philistine tone of mind, and indeed was rather bitter upon the
subject.  however, i made him promise that in his own interest he would
not publish his discovery till he had put the whole matter beyond the
reach of doubt; and for weeks and weeks we searched the registers of city
churches, the alleyn mss. at dulwich, the record office, the papers of
the lord chamberlain—everything, in fact, that we thought might contain
some allusion to willie hughes.  we discovered nothing, of course, and
every day the existence of willie hughes seemed to me to become more
problematical.  cyril was in a dreadful state, and used to go over the
whole question day after day, entreating me to believe; but i saw the one
flaw in the theory, and i refused to be convinced till the actual
existence of willie hughes, a boy-actor of elizabethan days, had been
placed beyond the reach of doubt or cavil.

‘one day cyril left town to stay with his grandfather, i thought at the
time, but i afterwards heard from lord crediton that this was not the
case; and about a fortnight afterwards i received a telegram from him,
handed in at warwick, asking me to be sure to come and dine with him that
evening at eight o’clock.  when i arrived, he said to me, “the only
apostle who did not deserve proof was st. thomas, and st. thomas was the
only apostle who got it.”  i asked him what he meant.  he answered that
he had not merely been able to establish the existence in the sixteenth
century of a boy-actor of the name of willie hughes, but to prove by the
most conclusive evidence that he was the mr. w. h. of the sonnets.  he
would not tell me anything more at the time; but after dinner he solemnly
produced the picture i showed you, and told me that he had discovered it
by the merest chance nailed to the side of an old chest that he had
bought at a farmhouse in warwickshire.  the chest itself, which was a
very fine example of elizabethan work, he had, of course, brought with
him, and in the centre of the front panel the initials w. h. were
undoubtedly carved.  it was this monogram that had attracted his
attention, and he told me that it was not till he had had the chest in
his possession for several days that he had thought of making any careful
examination of the inside.  one morning, however, he saw that one of the
sides of the chest was much thicker than the other, and looking more
closely, he discovered that a framed panel picture was clamped against
it.  on taking it out, he found it was the picture that is now lying on
the sofa.  it was very dirty, and covered with mould; but he managed to
clean it, and, to his great joy, saw that he had fallen by mere chance on
the one thing for which he had been looking.  here was an authentic
portrait of mr. w. h., with his hand resting on the dedicatory page of
the sonnets, and on the frame itself could be faintly seen the name of
the young man written in black uncial letters on a faded gold ground,
“master will. hews.”

‘well, what was i to say?  it never occurred to me for a moment that
cyril graham was playing a trick on me, or that he was trying to prove
his theory by means of a forgery.’

‘but is it a forgery?’ i asked.

‘of course it is,’ said erskine.  ‘it is a very good forgery; but it is a
forgery none the less.  i thought at the time that cyril was rather calm
about the whole matter; but i remember he more than once told me that he
himself required no proof of the kind, and that he thought the theory
complete without it.  i laughed at him, and told him that without it the
theory would fall to the ground, and i warmly congratulated him on the
marvellous discovery.  we then arranged that the picture should be etched
or facsimiled, and placed as the frontispiece to cyril’s edition of the
sonnets; and for three months we did nothing but go over each poem line
by line, till we had settled every difficulty of text or meaning.  one
unlucky day i was in a print-shop in holborn, when i saw upon the counter
some extremely beautiful drawings in silver-point.  i was so attracted by
them that i bought them; and the proprietor of the place, a man called
rawlings, told me that they were done by a young painter of the name of
edward merton, who was very clever, but as poor as a church mouse.  i
went to see merton some days afterwards, having got his address from the
printseller, and found a pale, interesting young man, with a rather
common-looking wife—his model, as i subsequently learned.  i told him how
much i admired his drawings, at which he seemed very pleased, and i asked
him if he would show me some of his other work.  as we were looking over
a portfolio, full of really very lovely things,—for merton had a most
delicate and delightful touch,—i suddenly caught sight of a drawing of
the picture of mr. w. h.  there was no doubt whatever about it.  it was
almost a _facsimile_—the only difference being that the two masks of
tragedy and comedy were not suspended from the marble table as they are
in the picture, but were lying on the floor at the young man’s feet.
“where on earth did you get that?” i said.  he grew rather confused, and
said—“oh, that is nothing.  i did not know it was in this portfolio.  it
is not a thing of any value.”  “it is what you did for mr. cyril graham,”
exclaimed his wife; “and if this gentleman wishes to buy it, let him have
it.”  “for mr. cyril graham?” i repeated.  “did you paint the picture of
mr. w. h.?”  “i don’t understand what you mean,” he answered, growing
very red.  well, the whole thing was quite dreadful.  the wife let it all
out.  i gave her five pounds when i was going away.  i can’t bear to
think of it now; but of course i was furious.  i went off at once to
cyril’s chambers, waited there for three hours before he came in, with
that horrid lie staring me in the face, and told him i had discovered his
forgery.  he grew very pale and said—“i did it purely for your sake.  you
would not be convinced in any other way.  it does not affect the truth of
the theory.”  “the truth of the theory!” i exclaimed; “the less we talk
about that the better.  you never even believed in it yourself.  if you
had, you would not have committed a forgery to prove it.”  high words
passed between us; we had a fearful quarrel.  i dare say i was unjust.
the next morning he was dead.’

‘dead!’ i cried,

‘yes; he shot himself with a revolver.  some of the blood splashed upon
the frame of the picture, just where the name had been painted.  by the
time i arrived—his servant had sent for me at once—the police were
already there.  he had left a letter for me, evidently written in the
greatest agitation and distress of mind.’

‘what was in it?’ i asked.

‘oh, that he believed absolutely in willie hughes; that the forgery of
the picture had been done simply as a concession to me, and did not in
the slightest degree invalidate the truth of the theory; and, that in
order to show me how firm and flawless his faith in the whole thing was,
he was going to offer his life as a sacrifice to the secret of the
sonnets.  it was a foolish, mad letter.  i remember he ended by saying
that he intrusted to me the willie hughes theory, and that it was for me
to present it to the world, and to unlock the secret of shakespeare’s
heart.’

‘it is a most tragic story,’ i cried; ‘but why have you not carried out
his wishes?’

erskine shrugged his shoulders.  ‘because it is a perfectly unsound
theory from beginning to end,’ he answered.

‘my dear erskine,’ i said, getting up from my seat, ‘you are entirely
wrong about the whole matter.  it is the only perfect key to
shakespeare’s sonnets that has ever been made.  it is complete in every
detail.  i believe in willie hughes.’

‘don’t say that,’ said erskine gravely; ‘i believe there is something
fatal about the idea, and intellectually there is nothing to be said for
it.  i have gone into the whole matter, and i assure you the theory is
entirely fallacious.  it is plausible up to a certain point.  then it
stops.  for heaven’s sake, my dear boy, don’t take up the subject of
willie hughes.  you will break your heart over it.’

‘erskine,’ i answered, ‘it is your duty to give this theory to the world.
if you will not do it, i will.  by keeping it back you wrong the memory
of cyril graham, the youngest and the most splendid of all the martyrs of
literature.  i entreat you to do him justice.  he died for this
thing,—don’t let his death be in vain.’

erskine looked at me in amazement.  ‘you are carried away by the
sentiment of the whole story,’ he said.  ‘you forget that a thing is not
necessarily true because a man dies for it.  i was devoted to cyril
graham.  his death was a horrible blow to me.  i did not recover it for
years.  i don’t think i have ever recovered it.  but willie hughes?
there is nothing in the idea of willie hughes.  no such person ever
existed.  as for bringing the whole thing before the world—the world
thinks that cyril graham shot himself by accident.  the only proof of his
suicide was contained in the letter to me, and of this letter the public
never heard anything.  to the present day lord crediton thinks that the
whole thing was accidental.’

‘cyril graham sacrificed his life to a great idea,’ i answered; ‘and if
you will not tell of his martyrdom, tell at least of his faith.’

‘his faith,’ said erskine, ‘was fixed in a thing that was false, in a
thing that was unsound, in a thing that no shakespearean scholar would
accept for a moment.  the theory would be laughed at.  don’t make a fool
of yourself, and don’t follow a trail that leads nowhere.  you start by
assuming the existence of the very person whose existence is the thing to
be proved.  besides, everybody knows that the sonnets were addressed to
lord pembroke.  the matter is settled once for all.’

‘the matter is not settled!’ i exclaimed.  ‘i will take up the theory
where cyril graham left it, and i will prove to the world that he was
right.’

‘silly boy!’ said erskine.  ‘go home: it is after two, and don’t think
about willie hughes any more.  i am sorry i told you anything about it,
and very sorry indeed that i should have converted you to a thing in
which i don’t believe.’

‘you have given me the key to the greatest mystery of modern literature,’
i answered; ‘and i shall not rest till i have made you recognise, till i
have made everybody recognise, that cyril graham was the most subtle
shakespearean critic of our day.’

as i walked home through st. james’s park the dawn was just breaking over
london.  the white swans were lying asleep on the polished lake, and the
gaunt palace looked purple against the pale-green sky.  i thought of
cyril graham, and my eyes filled with tears.



chapter ii


it was past twelve o’clock when i awoke, and the sun was streaming in
through the curtains of my room in long slanting beams of dusty gold.  i
told my servant that i would be at home to no one; and after i had had a
cup of chocolate and a _petit-pain_, i took down from the book-shelf my
copy of shakespeare’s sonnets, and began to go carefully through them.
every poem seemed to me to corroborate cyril graham’s theory.  i felt as
if i had my hand upon shakespeare’s heart, and was counting each separate
throb and pulse of passion.  i thought of the wonderful boy-actor, and
saw his face in every line.

two sonnets, i remember, struck me particularly: they were the 53rd and
the 67th.  in the first of these, shakespeare, complimenting willie
hughes on the versatility of his acting, on his wide range of parts, a
range extending from rosalind to juliet, and from beatrice to ophelia,
says to him—

    what is your substance, whereof are you made,
    that millions of strange shadows on you tend?
    since every one hath, every one, one shade,
    and you, but one, can every shadow lend—

lines that would be unintelligible if they were not addressed to an
actor, for the word ‘shadow’ had in shakespeare’s day a technical meaning
connected with the stage.  ‘the best in this kind are but shadows,’ says
theseus of the actors in the _midsummer night’s dream_, and there are
many similar allusions in the literature of the day.  these sonnets
evidently belonged to the series in which shakespeare discusses the
nature of the actor’s art, and of the strange and rare temperament that
is essential to the perfect stage-player.  ‘how is it,’ says shakespeare
to willie hughes, ‘that you have so many personalities?’ and then he goes
on to point out that his beauty is such that it seems to realise every
form and phase of fancy, to embody each dream of the creative
imagination—an idea that is still further expanded in the sonnet that
immediately follows, where, beginning with the fine thought,

    o, how much more doth beauty beauteous seem
    by that sweet ornament which _truth_ doth give!

shakespeare invites us to notice how the truth of acting, the truth of
visible presentation on the stage, adds to the wonder of poetry, giving
life to its loveliness, and actual reality to its ideal form.  and yet,
in the 67th sonnet, shakespeare calls upon willie hughes to abandon the
stage with its artificiality, its false mimic life of painted face and
unreal costume, its immoral influences and suggestions, its remoteness
from the true world of noble action and sincere utterance.

    ah, wherefore with infection should he live
    and with his presence grace impiety,
    that sin by him advantage should achieve
    and lace itself with his society?
    why should false painting imitate his cheek,
    and steal dead seeming of his living hue?
    why should poor beauty indirectly seek
    roses of shadow, since his rose is true?

it may seem strange that so great a dramatist as shakespeare, who
realised his own perfection as an artist and his humanity as a man on the
ideal plane of stage-writing and stage-playing, should have written in
these terms about the theatre; but we must remember that in sonnets cx.
and cxi. shakespeare shows us that he too was wearied of the world of
puppets, and full of shame at having made himself ‘a motley to the view.’
the 111th sonnet is especially bitter:—

    o, for my sake do you with fortune chide,
    the guilty goddess of my harmful deeds,
    that did not better for my life provide
    than public means which public manners breeds.
    thence comes it that my name receives a brand,
    and almost thence my nature is subdued
    to what it works in, like the dyer’s hand:
    pity me then and wish i were renew’d—

and there are many signs elsewhere of the same feeling, signs familiar to
all real students of shakespeare.

one point puzzled me immensely as i read the sonnets, and it was days
before i struck on the true interpretation, which indeed cyril graham
himself seems to have missed.  i could not understand how it was that
shakespeare set so high a value on his young friend marrying.  he himself
had married young, and the result had been unhappiness, and it was not
likely that he would have asked willie hughes to commit the same error.
the boy-player of rosalind had nothing to gain from marriage, or from the
passions of real life.  the early sonnets, with their strange entreaties
to have children, seemed to me a jarring note.  the explanation of the
mystery came on me quite suddenly, and i found it in the curious
dedication.  it will be remembered that the dedication runs as follows:—

                           to the onlie begetter of
                            these insuing sonnets
                           mr. w. h. all happinesse
                              and that eternitie
                                   promised
                                      by
                             our ever-living poet
                                   wisheth
                               the well-wishing
                                adventurer in
                                   setting
                                    forth.

                                                                     t. t.

some scholars have supposed that the word ‘begetter’ in this dedication
means simply the procurer of the sonnets for thomas thorpe the publisher;
but this view is now generally abandoned, and the highest authorities are
quite agreed that it is to be taken in the sense of inspirer, the
metaphor being drawn from the analogy of physical life.  now i saw that
the same metaphor was used by shakespeare himself all through the poems,
and this set me on the right track.  finally i made my great discovery.
the marriage that shakespeare proposes for willie hughes is the marriage
with his muse, an expression which is definitely put forward in the 82nd
sonnet, where, in the bitterness of his heart at the defection of the
boy-actor for whom he had written his greatest parts, and whose beauty
had indeed suggested them, he opens his complaint by saying—

    i grant thou wert not married to my muse.

the children he begs him to beget are no children of flesh and blood, but
more immortal children of undying fame.  the whole cycle of the early
sonnets is simply shakespeare’s invitation to willie hughes to go upon
the stage and become a player.  how barren and profitless a thing, he
says, is this beauty of yours if it be not used:—

    when forty winters shall besiege thy brow
    and dig deep trenches in thy beauty’s field,
    thy youth’s proud livery, so gazed on now,
    will be a tatter’d weed, of small worth held:
    then being ask’d where all thy beauty lies,
    where all the treasure of thy lusty days,
    to say, within thine own deep-sunken eyes,
    were an all-eating shame and thriftless praise.

you must create something in art: my verse ‘is thine, and _born_ of
thee’; only listen to me, and i will ‘_bring forth_ eternal numbers to
outlive long date,’ and you shall people with forms of your own image the
imaginary world of the stage.  these children that you beget, he
continues, will not wither away, as mortal children do, but you shall
live in them and in my plays: do but—

    make thee another self, for love of me,
    that beauty still may live in thine or thee.

i collected all the passages that seemed to me to corroborate this view,
and they produced a strong impression on me, and showed me how complete
cyril graham’s theory really was.  i also saw that it was quite easy to
separate those lines in which he speaks of the sonnets themselves from
those in which he speaks of his great dramatic work.  this was a point
that had been entirely overlooked by all critics up to cyril graham’s
day.  and yet it was one of the most important points in the whole series
of poems.  to the sonnets shakespeare was more or less indifferent.  he
did not wish to rest his fame on them.  they were to him his ‘slight
muse,’ as he calls them, and intended, as meres tells us, for private
circulation only among a few, a very few, friends.  upon the other hand
he was extremely conscious of the high artistic value of his plays, and
shows a noble self-reliance upon his dramatic genius.  when he says to
willie hughes:

    but thy eternal summer shall not fade,
    nor lose possession of that fair thou owest;
    nor shall death brag thou wander’st in his shade,
    when in _eternal lines_ to time thou grow’st:
    so long as men can breathe, or eyes can see,
    so long lives this, and this gives life to thee;—

the expression ‘eternal lines’ clearly alludes to one of his plays that
he was sending him at the time, just as the concluding couplet points to
his confidence in the probability of his plays being always acted.  in
his address to the dramatic muse (sonnets c. and ci.), we find the same
feeling.

    where art thou, muse, that thou forget’st so long
    to speak of that which gives thee all thy might?
    spend’st thou thy fury on some worthless song,
    darkening thy power to lend base subjects light?

he cries, and he then proceeds to reproach the mistress of tragedy and
comedy for her ‘neglect of truth in beauty dyed,’ and says—

    because he needs no praise, wilt thou be dumb?
    excuse not silence so, for ‘t lies in thee
    to make him much outlive a gilded tomb
    and to be praised of ages yet to be.
    then do thy office, muse; i teach thee how
    to make him seem long hence as he shows now.

it is, however, perhaps in the 55th sonnet that shakespeare gives to this
idea its fullest expression.  to imagine that the ‘powerful rhyme’ of the
second line refers to the sonnet itself, is to mistake shakespeare’s
meaning entirely.  it seemed to me that it was extremely likely, from the
general character of the sonnet, that a particular play was meant, and
that the play was none other but _romeo and juliet_.

    not marble, nor the gilded monuments
    of princes, shall outlive this powerful rhyme;
    but you shall shine more bright in these contents
    than unswept stone besmear’d with sluttish time.
    when wasteful wars shall statues overturn,
    and broils root out the work of masonry,
    nor mars his sword nor war’s quick fire shall burn
    the living record of your memory.
    ‘gainst death and all-oblivious enmity
    shall you pace forth; your praise shall still find room
    even in the eyes of all posterity
    that wear this world out to the ending doom.
    so, till the judgement that yourself arise,
    you live in this, and dwell in lovers’ eyes.

it was also extremely suggestive to note how here as elsewhere
shakespeare promised willie hughes immortality in a form that appealed to
men’s eyes—that is to say, in a spectacular form, in a play that is to be
looked at.

for two weeks i worked hard at the sonnets, hardly ever going out, and
refusing all invitations.  every day i seemed to be discovering something
new, and willie hughes became to me a kind of spiritual presence, an
ever-dominant personality.  i could almost fancy that i saw him standing
in the shadow of my room, so well had shakespeare drawn him, with his
golden hair, his tender flower-like grace, his dreamy deep-sunken eyes,
his delicate mobile limbs, and his white lily hands.  his very name
fascinated me.  willie hughes!  willie hughes!  how musically it sounded!
yes; who else but he could have been the master-mistress of shakespeare’s
passion, {1} the lord of his love to whom he was bound in vassalage, {2}
the delicate minion of pleasure, {3} the rose of the whole world, {4} the
herald of the spring {5} decked in the proud livery of youth, {6} the
lovely boy whom it was sweet music to hear, {7} and whose beauty was the
very raiment of shakespeare’s heart, {8} as it was the keystone of his
dramatic power?  how bitter now seemed the whole tragedy of his desertion
and his shame!—shame that he made sweet and lovely {9} by the mere magic
of his personality, but that was none the less shame.  yet as shakespeare
forgave him, should not we forgive him also?  i did not care to pry into
the mystery of his sin.

his abandonment of shakespeare’s theatre was a different matter, and i
investigated it at great length.  finally i came to the conclusion that
cyril graham had been wrong in regarding the rival dramatist of the 80th
sonnet as chapman.  it was obviously marlowe who was alluded to.  at the
time the sonnets were written, such an expression as ‘the proud full sail
of his great verse’ could not have been used of chapman’s work, however
applicable it might have been to the style of his later jacobean plays.
no: marlowe was clearly the rival dramatist of whom shakespeare spoke in
such laudatory terms; and that

                affable familiar ghost
    which nightly gulls him with intelligence,

was the mephistopheles of his _doctor faustus_.  no doubt, marlowe was
fascinated by the beauty and grace of the boy-actor, and lured him away
from the blackfriars theatre, that he might play the gaveston of his
_edward ii_.  that shakespeare had the legal right to retain willie
hughes in his own company is evident from sonnet lxxxvii., where he
says:—

    farewell! thou art too dear for my possessing,
    and like enough thou know’st thy estimate:
    the _charter of thy worth_ gives thee releasing;
    my _bonds_ in thee are all determinate.
    for how do i hold thee but by thy granting?
    and for that riches where is my deserving?
    the cause of this fair gift in me is wanting,
    _and so my patent back again is swerving_.
    thyself thou gayest, thy own worth then not knowing,
    or me, to whom thou gavest it, else mistaking;
    so thy great gift, upon misprision growing,
    comes home again, on better judgement making.
       thus have i had thee, as a dream doth flatter,
       in sleep a king, but waking no such matter.

but him whom he could not hold by love, he would not hold by force.
willie hughes became a member of lord pembroke’s company, and, perhaps in
the open yard of the red bull tavern, played the part of king edward’s
delicate minion.  on marlowe’s death, he seems to have returned to
shakespeare, who, whatever his fellow-partners may have thought of the
matter, was not slow to forgive the wilfulness and treachery of the young
actor.

how well, too, had shakespeare drawn the temperament of the stage-player!
willie hughes was one of those

    that do not do the thing they most do show,
    who, moving others, are themselves as stone.

he could act love, but could not feel it, could mimic passion without
realising it.

    in many’s looks the false heart’s history
    is writ in moods and frowns and wrinkles strange,

but with willie hughes it was not so.  ‘heaven,’ says shakespeare, in a
sonnet of mad idolatry—

       heaven in thy creation did decree
    that in thy face sweet love should ever dwell;
    whate’er thy thoughts or thy heart’s workings be,
    thy looks should nothing thence but sweetness tell.

in his ‘inconstant mind’ and his ‘false heart,’ it was easy to recognise
the insincerity and treachery that somehow seem inseparable from the
artistic nature, as in his love of praise that desire for immediate
recognition that characterises all actors.  and yet, more fortunate in
this than other actors, willie hughes was to know something of
immortality.  inseparably connected with shakespeare’s plays, he was to
live in them.

    your name from hence immortal life shall have,
    though i, once gone, to all the world must die:
    the earth can yield me but a common grave,
    when you entombed in men’s eyes shall lie.
    your monument shall be my gentle verse,
    which eyes not yet created shall o’er-read,
    and tongues to be your being shall rehearse,
    when all the breathers of this world are dead.

there were endless allusions, also, to willie hughes’s power over his
audience—the ‘gazers,’ as shakespeare calls them; but perhaps the most
perfect description of his wonderful mastery over dramatic art was in _a
lover’s complaint_, where shakespeare says of him:—

    in him a plenitude of subtle matter,
    applied to cautels, all strange forms receives,
    of burning blushes, or of weeping water,
    or swooning paleness; and he takes and leaves,
    in either’s aptness, as it best deceives,
    to blush at speeches rank, to weep at woes,
    or to turn white and swoon at tragic shows.

                                  * * * * *

    so on the tip of his subduing tongue,
    all kind of arguments and questions deep,
    all replication prompt and reason strong,
    for his advantage still did wake and sleep,
    to make the weeper laugh, the laugher weep.
       he had the dialect and the different skill,
       catching all passions in his craft of will.

once i thought that i had really found willie hughes in elizabethan
literature.  in a wonderfully graphic account of the last days of the
great earl of essex, his chaplain, thomas knell, tells us that the night
before the earl died, ‘he called william hewes, which was his musician,
to play upon the virginals and to sing.  “play,” said he, “my song, will
hewes, and i will sing it to myself.”  so he did it most joyfully, not as
the howling swan, which, still looking down, waileth her end, but as a
sweet lark, lifting up his hands and casting up his eyes to his god, with
this mounted the crystal skies, and reached with his unwearied tongue the
top of highest heavens.’  surely the boy who played on the virginals to
the dying father of sidney’s stella was none other but the will hews to
whom shakespeare dedicated the sonnets, and who he tells us was himself
sweet ‘music to hear.’  yet lord essex died in 1576, when shakespeare
himself was but twelve years of age.  it was impossible that his musician
could have been the mr. w. h. of the sonnets.  perhaps shakespeare’s
young friend was the son of the player upon the virginals?  it was at
least something to have discovered that will hews was an elizabethan
name.  indeed the name hews seemed to have been closely connected with
music and the stage.  the first english actress was the lovely margaret
hews, whom prince rupert so madly loved.  what more probable than that
between her and lord essex’s musician had come the boy-actor of
shakespeare’s plays?  but the proofs, the links—where were they?  alas! i
could not find them.  it seemed to me that i was always on the brink of
absolute verification, but that i could never really attain to it.

from willie hughes’s life i soon passed to thoughts of his death.  i used
to wonder what had been his end.

perhaps he had been one of those english actors who in 1604 went across
sea to germany and played before the great duke henry julius of
brunswick, himself a dramatist of no mean order, and at the court of that
strange elector of brandenburg, who was so enamoured of beauty that he
was said to have bought for his weight in amber the young son of a
travelling greek merchant, and to have given pageants in honour of his
slave all through that dreadful famine year of 1606–7, when the people
died of hunger in the very streets of the town, and for the space of
seven months there was no rain.  we know at any rate that _romeo and
juliet_ was brought out at dresden in 1613, along with _hamlet_ and _king
lear_, and it was surely to none other than willie hughes that in 1615
the death-mask of shakespeare was brought by the hand of one of the suite
of the english ambassador, pale token of the passing away of the great
poet who had so dearly loved him.  indeed there would have been something
peculiarly fitting in the idea that the boy-actor, whose beauty had been
so vital an element in the realism and romance of shakespeare’s art,
should have been the first to have brought to germany the seed of the new
culture, and was in his way the precursor of that _aufklärung_ or
illumination of the eighteenth century, that splendid movement which,
though begun by lessing and herder, and brought to its full and perfect
issue by goethe, was in no small part helped on by another
actor—friedrich schroeder—who awoke the popular consciousness, and by
means of the feigned passions and mimetic methods of the stage showed the
intimate, the vital, connection between life and literature.  if this was
so—and there was certainly no evidence against it—it was not improbable
that willie hughes was one of those english comedians (_mimæ quidam ex
britannia_, as the old chronicle calls them), who were slain at nuremberg
in a sudden uprising of the people, and were secretly buried in a little
vineyard outside the city by some young men ‘who had found pleasure in
their performances, and of whom some had sought to be instructed in the
mysteries of the new art.’  certainly no more fitting place could there
be for him to whom shakespeare said, ‘thou art all my art,’ than this
little vineyard outside the city walls.  for was it not from the sorrows
of dionysos that tragedy sprang?  was not the light laughter of comedy,
with its careless merriment and quick replies, first heard on the lips of
the sicilian vine-dressers?  nay, did not the purple and red stain of the
wine-froth on face and limbs give the first suggestion of the charm and
fascination of disguise—the desire for self-concealment, the sense of the
value of objectivity thus showing itself in the rude beginnings of the
art?  at any rate, wherever he lay—whether in the little vineyard at the
gate of the gothic town, or in some dim london churchyard amidst the roar
and bustle of our great city—no gorgeous monument marked his
resting-place.  his true tomb, as shakespeare saw, was the poet’s verse,
his true monument the permanence of the drama.  so had it been with
others whose beauty had given a new creative impulse to their age.  the
ivory body of the bithynian slave rots in the green ooze of the nile, and
on the yellow hills of the cerameicus is strewn the dust of the young
athenian; but antinous lives in sculpture, and charmides in philosophy.



chapter iii


after three weeks had elapsed, i determined to make a strong appeal to
erskine to do justice to the memory of cyril graham, and to give to the
world his marvellous interpretation of the sonnets—the only
interpretation that thoroughly explained the problem.  i have not any
copy of my letter, i regret to say, nor have i been able to lay my hand
upon the original; but i remember that i went over the whole ground, and
covered sheets of paper with passionate reiteration of the arguments and
proofs that my study had suggested to me.  it seemed to me that i was not
merely restoring cyril graham to his proper place in literary history,
but rescuing the honour of shakespeare himself from the tedious memory of
a commonplace intrigue.  i put into the letter all my enthusiasm.  i put
into the letter all my faith.

no sooner, in fact, had i sent it off than a curious reaction came over
me.  it seemed to me that i had given away my capacity for belief in the
willie hughes theory of the sonnets, that something had gone out of me,
as it were, and that i was perfectly indifferent to the whole subject.
what was it that had happened?  it is difficult to say.  perhaps, by
finding perfect expression for a passion, i had exhausted the passion
itself.  emotional forces, like the forces of physical life, have their
positive limitations.  perhaps the mere effort to convert any one to a
theory involves some form of renunciation of the power of credence.
perhaps i was simply tired of the whole thing, and, my enthusiasm having
burnt out, my reason was left to its own unimpassioned judgment.  however
it came about, and i cannot pretend to explain it, there was no doubt
that willie hughes suddenly became to me a mere myth, an idle dream, the
boyish fancy of a young man who, like most ardent spirits, was more
anxious to convince others than to be himself convinced.

as i had said some very unjust and bitter things to erskine in my letter,
i determined to go and see him at once, and to make my apologies to him
for my behaviour.  accordingly, the next morning i drove down to birdcage
walk, and found erskine sitting in his library, with the forged picture
of willie hughes in front of him.

‘my dear erskine!’ i cried, ‘i have come to apologise to you.’

‘to apologise to me?’ he said.  ‘what for?’

‘for my letter,’ i answered.

‘you have nothing to regret in your letter,’ he said.  ‘on the contrary,
you have done me the greatest service in your power.  you have shown me
that cyril graham’s theory is perfectly sound.’

‘you don’t mean to say that you believe in willie hughes?’ i exclaimed.

‘why not?’ he rejoined.  ‘you have proved the thing to me.  do you think
i cannot estimate the value of evidence?’

‘but there is no evidence at all,’ i groaned, sinking into a chair.
‘when i wrote to you i was under the influence of a perfectly silly
enthusiasm.  i had been touched by the story of cyril graham’s death,
fascinated by his romantic theory, enthralled by the wonder and novelty
of the whole idea.  i see now that the theory is based on a delusion.
the only evidence for the existence of willie hughes is that picture in
front of you, and the picture is a forgery.  don’t be carried away by
mere sentiment in this matter.  whatever romance may have to say about
the willie hughes theory, reason is dead against it.’

‘i don’t understand you,’ said erskine, looking at me in amazement.
‘why, you yourself have convinced me by your letter that willie hughes is
an absolute reality.  why have you changed your mind?  or is all that you
have been saying to me merely a joke?’

‘i cannot explain it to you,’ i rejoined, ‘but i see now that there is
really nothing to be said in favour of cyril graham’s interpretation.
the sonnets are addressed to lord pembroke.  for heaven’s sake don’t
waste your time in a foolish attempt to discover a young elizabethan
actor who never existed, and to make a phantom puppet the centre of the
great cycle of shakespeare’s sonnets.’

‘i see that you don’t understand the theory,’ he replied.

‘my dear erskine,’ i cried, ‘not understand it!  why, i feel as if i had
invented it.  surely my letter shows you that i not merely went into the
whole matter, but that i contributed proofs of every kind.  the one flaw
in the theory is that it presupposes the existence of the person whose
existence is the subject of dispute.  if we grant that there was in
shakespeare’s company a young actor of the name of willie hughes, it is
not difficult to make him the object of the sonnets.  but as we know that
there was no actor of this name in the company of the globe theatre, it
is idle to pursue the investigation further.’

‘but that is exactly what we don’t know,’ said erskine.  ‘it is quite
true that his name does not occur in the list given in the first folio;
but, as cyril pointed out, that is rather a proof in favour of the
existence of willie hughes than against it, if we remember his
treacherous desertion of shakespeare for a rival dramatist.’

we argued the matter over for hours, but nothing that i could say could
make erskine surrender his faith in cyril graham’s interpretation.  he
told me that he intended to devote his life to proving the theory, and
that he was determined to do justice to cyril graham’s memory.  i
entreated him, laughed at him, begged of him, but it was of no use.
finally we parted, not exactly in anger, but certainly with a shadow
between us.  he thought me shallow, i thought him foolish.  when i called
on him again his servant told me that he had gone to germany.

two years afterwards, as i was going into my club, the hall-porter handed
me a letter with a foreign postmark.  it was from erskine, and written at
the hôtel d’angleterre, cannes.  when i had read it i was filled with
horror, though i did not quite believe that he would be so mad as to
carry his resolve into execution.  the gist of the letter was that he had
tried in every way to verify the willie hughes theory, and had failed,
and that as cyril graham had given his life for this theory, he himself
had determined to give his own life also to the same cause.  the
concluding words of the letter were these: ‘i still believe in willie
hughes; and by the time you receive this, i shall have died by my own
hand for willie hughes’s sake: for his sake, and for the sake of cyril
graham, whom i drove to his death by my shallow scepticism and ignorant
lack of faith.  the truth was once revealed to you, and you rejected it.
it comes to you now stained with the blood of two lives,—do not turn away
from it.’

it was a horrible moment.  i felt sick with misery, and yet i could not
believe it.  to die for one’s theological beliefs is the worst use a man
can make of his life, but to die for a literary theory!  it seemed
impossible.

i looked at the date.  the letter was a week old.  some unfortunate
chance had prevented my going to the club for several days, or i might
have got it in time to save him.  perhaps it was not too late.  i drove
off to my rooms, packed up my things, and started by the night-mail from
charing cross.  the journey was intolerable.  i thought i would never
arrive.  as soon as i did i drove to the hôtel l’angleterre.  they told
me that erskine had been buried two days before in the english cemetery.
there was something horribly grotesque about the whole tragedy.  i said
all kinds of wild things, and the people in the hall looked curiously at
me.

suddenly lady erskine, in deep mourning, passed across the vestibule.
when she saw me she came up to me, murmured something about her poor son,
and burst into tears.  i led her into her sitting-room.  an elderly
gentleman was there waiting for her.  it was the english doctor.

we talked a great deal about erskine, but i said nothing about his motive
for committing suicide.  it was evident that he had not told his mother
anything about the reason that had driven him to so fatal, so mad an act.
finally lady erskine rose and said, george left you something as a
memento.  it was a thing he prized very much.  i will get it for you.

as soon as she had left the room i turned to the doctor and said, ‘what a
dreadful shock it must have been to lady erskine!  i wonder that she
bears it as well as she does.’

‘oh, she knew for months past that it was coming,’ he answered.

‘knew it for months past!’ i cried.  ‘but why didn’t she stop him?  why
didn’t she have him watched?  he must have been mad.’

the doctor stared at me. ‘i don’t know what you mean,’ he said.

‘well,’ i cried, ‘if a mother knows that her son is going to commit
suicide—’

‘suicide!’ he answered.  ‘poor erskine did not commit suicide.  he died
of consumption.  he came here to die.  the moment i saw him i knew that
there was no hope.  one lung was almost gone, and the other was very much
affected.  three days before he died he asked me was there any hope.  i
told him frankly that there was none, and that he had only a few days to
live.  he wrote some letters, and was quite resigned, retaining his
senses to the last.’

at that moment lady erskine entered the room with the fatal picture of
willie hughes in her hand.  ‘when george was dying he begged me to give
you this,’ she said.  as i took it from her, her tears fell on my hand.

the picture hangs now in my library, where it is very much admired by my
artistic friends.  they have decided that it is not a clouet, but an
oudry.  i have never cared to tell them its true history.  but sometimes,
when i look at it, i think that there is really a great deal to be said
for the willie hughes theory of shakespeare’s sonnets.


<|EndOfText|>

de profundis


. . . suffering is one very long moment.  we cannot divide it by seasons.
we can only record its moods, and chronicle their return.  with us time
itself does not progress.  it revolves.  it seems to circle round one
centre of pain.  the paralysing immobility of a life every circumstance
of which is regulated after an unchangeable pattern, so that we eat and
drink and lie down and pray, or kneel at least for prayer, according to
the inflexible laws of an iron formula: this immobile quality, that makes
each dreadful day in the very minutest detail like its brother, seems to
communicate itself to those external forces the very essence of whose
existence is ceaseless change.  of seed-time or harvest, of the reapers
bending over the corn, or the grape gatherers threading through the
vines, of the grass in the orchard made white with broken blossoms or
strewn with fallen fruit: of these we know nothing and can know nothing.

for us there is only one season, the season of sorrow.  the very sun and
moon seem taken from us.  outside, the day may be blue and gold, but the
light that creeps down through the thickly-muffled glass of the small
iron-barred window beneath which one sits is grey and niggard.  it is
always twilight in one's cell, as it is always twilight in one's heart.
and in the sphere of thought, no less than in the sphere of time, motion
is no more.  the thing that you personally have long ago forgotten, or
can easily forget, is happening to me now, and will happen to me again to-
morrow.  remember this, and you will be able to understand a little of
why i am writing, and in this manner writing. . . .

a week later, i am transferred here.  three more months go over and my
mother dies.  no one knew how deeply i loved and honoured her.  her death
was terrible to me; but i, once a lord of language, have no words in
which to express my anguish and my shame.  she and my father had
bequeathed me a name they had made noble and honoured, not merely in
literature, art, archaeology, and science, but in the public history of
my own country, in its evolution as a nation.  i had disgraced that name
eternally.  i had made it a low by-word among low people.  i had dragged
it through the very mire.  i had given it to brutes that they might make
it brutal, and to fools that they might turn it into a synonym for folly.
what i suffered then, and still suffer, is not for pen to write or paper
to record.  my wife, always kind and gentle to me, rather than that i
should hear the news from indifferent lips, travelled, ill as she was,
all the way from genoa to england to break to me herself the tidings of
so irreparable, so irremediable, a loss.  messages of sympathy reached me
from all who had still affection for me.  even people who had not known
me personally, hearing that a new sorrow had broken into my life, wrote
to ask that some expression of their condolence should be conveyed to me.
. . .

three months go over.  the calendar of my daily conduct and labour that
hangs on the outside of my cell door, with my name and sentence written
upon it, tells me that it is may. . . .

prosperity, pleasure and success, may be rough of grain and common in
fibre, but sorrow is the most sensitive of all created things.  there is
nothing that stirs in the whole world of thought to which sorrow does not
vibrate in terrible and exquisite pulsation.  the thin beaten-out leaf of
tremulous gold that chronicles the direction of forces the eye cannot see
is in comparison coarse.  it is a wound that bleeds when any hand but
that of love touches it, and even then must bleed again, though not in
pain.

where there is sorrow there is holy ground.  some day people will realise
what that means.  they will know nothing of life till they do,--and
natures like his can realise it.  when i was brought down from my prison
to the court of bankruptcy, between two policemen,--waited in the long
dreary corridor that, before the whole crowd, whom an action so sweet and
simple hushed into silence, he might gravely raise his hat to me, as,
handcuffed and with bowed head, i passed him by.  men have gone to heaven
for smaller things than that.  it was in this spirit, and with this mode
of love, that the saints knelt down to wash the feet of the poor, or
stooped to kiss the leper on the cheek.  i have never said one single
word to him about what he did.  i do not know to the present moment
whether he is aware that i was even conscious of his action.  it is not a
thing for which one can render formal thanks in formal words.  i store it
in the treasure-house of my heart.  i keep it there as a secret debt that
i am glad to think i can never possibly repay.  it is embalmed and kept
sweet by the myrrh and cassia of many tears.  when wisdom has been
profitless to me, philosophy barren, and the proverbs and phrases of
those who have sought to give me consolation as dust and ashes in my
mouth, the memory of that little, lovely, silent act of love has unsealed
for me all the wells of pity: made the desert blossom like a rose, and
brought me out of the bitterness of lonely exile into harmony with the
wounded, broken, and great heart of the world.  when people are able to
understand, not merely how beautiful ---'s action was, but why it meant
so much to me, and always will mean so much, then, perhaps, they will
realise how and in what spirit they should approach me. . . .

the poor are wise, more charitable, more kind, more sensitive than we
are.  in their eyes prison is a tragedy in a man's life, a misfortune, a
casuality, something that calls for sympathy in others.  they speak of
one who is in prison as of one who is 'in trouble' simply.  it is the
phrase they always use, and the expression has the perfect wisdom of love
in it.  with people of our own rank it is different.  with us, prison
makes a man a pariah.  i, and such as i am, have hardly any right to air
and sun.  our presence taints the pleasures of others.  we are unwelcome
when we reappear.  to revisit the glimpses of the moon is not for us.  our
very children are taken away.  those lovely links with humanity are
broken.  we are doomed to be solitary, while our sons still live.  we are
denied the one thing that might heal us and keep us, that might bring
balm to the bruised heart, and peace to the soul in pain. . . .

i must say to myself that i ruined myself, and that nobody great or small
can be ruined except by his own hand.  i am quite ready to say so.  i am
trying to say so, though they may not think it at the present moment.
this pitiless indictment i bring without pity against myself.  terrible
as was what the world did to me, what i did to myself was far more
terrible still.

i was a man who stood in symbolic relations to the art and culture of my
age.  i had realised this for myself at the very dawn of my manhood, and
had forced my age to realise it afterwards.  few men hold such a position
in their own lifetime, and have it so acknowledged.  it is usually
discerned, if discerned at all, by the historian, or the critic, long
after both the man and his age have passed away.  with me it was
different.  i felt it myself, and made others feel it.  byron was a
symbolic figure, but his relations were to the passion of his age and its
weariness of passion.  mine were to something more noble, more permanent,
of more vital issue, of larger scope.

the gods had given me almost everything.  but i let myself be lured into
long spells of senseless and sensual ease.  i amused myself with being a
_flaneur_, a dandy, a man of fashion.  i surrounded myself with the
smaller natures and the meaner minds.  i became the spendthrift of my own
genius, and to waste an eternal youth gave me a curious joy.  tired of
being on the heights, i deliberately went to the depths in the search for
new sensation.  what the paradox was to me in the sphere of thought,
perversity became to me in the sphere of passion.  desire, at the end,
was a malady, or a madness, or both.  i grew careless of the lives of
others.  i took pleasure where it pleased me, and passed on.  i forgot
that every little action of the common day makes or unmakes character,
and that therefore what one has done in the secret chamber one has some
day to cry aloud on the housetop.  i ceased to be lord over myself.  i
was no longer the captain of my soul, and did not know it.  i allowed
pleasure to dominate me.  i ended in horrible disgrace.  there is only
one thing for me now, absolute humility.

i have lain in prison for nearly two years.  out of my nature has come
wild despair; an abandonment to grief that was piteous even to look at;
terrible and impotent rage; bitterness and scorn; anguish that wept
aloud; misery that could find no voice; sorrow that was dumb.  i have
passed through every possible mood of suffering.  better than wordsworth
himself i know what wordsworth meant when he said--

   'suffering is permanent, obscure, and dark
   and has the nature of infinity.'

but while there were times when i rejoiced in the idea that my sufferings
were to be endless, i could not bear them to be without meaning.  now i
find hidden somewhere away in my nature something that tells me that
nothing in the whole world is meaningless, and suffering least of all.
that something hidden away in my nature, like a treasure in a field, is
humility.

it is the last thing left in me, and the best: the ultimate discovery at
which i have arrived, the starting-point for a fresh development.  it has
come to me right out of myself, so i know that it has come at the proper
time.  it could not have come before, nor later.  had any one told me of
it, i would have rejected it.  had it been brought to me, i would have
refused it.  as i found it, i want to keep it.  i must do so.  it is the
one thing that has in it the elements of life, of a new life, _vita
nuova_ for me.  of all things it is the strangest.  one cannot acquire
it, except by surrendering everything that one has.  it is only when one
has lost all things, that one knows that one possesses it.

now i have realised that it is in me, i see quite clearly what i ought to
do; in fact, must do.  and when i use such a phrase as that, i need not
say that i am not alluding to any external sanction or command.  i admit
none.  i am far more of an individualist than i ever was.  nothing seems
to me of the smallest value except what one gets out of oneself.  my
nature is seeking a fresh mode of self-realisation.  that is all i am
concerned with.  and the first thing that i have got to do is to free
myself from any possible bitterness of feeling against the world.

i am completely penniless, and absolutely homeless.  yet there are worse
things in the world than that.  i am quite candid when i say that rather
than go out from this prison with bitterness in my heart against the
world, i would gladly and readily beg my bread from door to door.  if i
got nothing from the house of the rich i would get something at the house
of the poor.  those who have much are often greedy; those who have little
always share.  i would not a bit mind sleeping in the cool grass in
summer, and when winter came on sheltering myself by the warm
close-thatched rick, or under the penthouse of a great barn, provided i
had love in my heart.  the external things of life seem to me now of no
importance at all.  you can see to what intensity of individualism i have
arrived--or am arriving rather, for the journey is long, and 'where i
walk there are thorns.'

of course i know that to ask alms on the highway is not to be my lot, and
that if ever i lie in the cool grass at night-time it will be to write
sonnets to the moon.  when i go out of prison, r--- will be waiting for
me on the other side of the big iron-studded gate, and he is the symbol,
not merely of his own affection, but of the affection of many others
besides.  i believe i am to have enough to live on for about eighteen
months at any rate, so that if i may not write beautiful books, i may at
least read beautiful books; and what joy can be greater?  after that, i
hope to be able to recreate my creative faculty.

but were things different: had i not a friend left in the world; were
there not a single house open to me in pity; had i to accept the wallet
and ragged cloak of sheer penury: as long as i am free from all
resentment, hardness and scorn, i would be able to face the life with
much more calm and confidence than i would were my body in purple and
fine linen, and the soul within me sick with hate.

and i really shall have no difficulty.  when you really want love you
will find it waiting for you.

i need not say that my task does not end there.  it would be
comparatively easy if it did.  there is much more before me.  i have
hills far steeper to climb, valleys much darker to pass through.  and i
have to get it all out of myself.  neither religion, morality, nor reason
can help me at all.

morality does not help me.  i am a born antinomian.  i am one of those
who are made for exceptions, not for laws.  but while i see that there is
nothing wrong in what one does, i see that there is something wrong in
what one becomes.  it is well to have learned that.

religion does not help me.  the faith that others give to what is unseen,
i give to what one can touch, and look at.  my gods dwell in temples made
with hands; and within the circle of actual experience is my creed made
perfect and complete: too complete, it may be, for like many or all of
those who have placed their heaven in this earth, i have found in it not
merely the beauty of heaven, but the horror of hell also.  when i think
about religion at all, i feel as if i would like to found an order for
those who _cannot_ believe: the confraternity of the faithless, one might
call it, where on an altar, on which no taper burned, a priest, in whose
heart peace had no dwelling, might celebrate with unblessed bread and a
chalice empty of wine.  every thing to be true must become a religion.
and agnosticism should have its ritual no less than faith.  it has sown
its martyrs, it should reap its saints, and praise god daily for having
hidden himself from man.  but whether it be faith or agnosticism, it must
be nothing external to me.  its symbols must be of my own creating.  only
that is spiritual which makes its own form.  if i may not find its secret
within myself, i shall never find it: if i have not got it already, it
will never come to me.

reason does not help me.  it tells me that the laws under which i am
convicted are wrong and unjust laws, and the system under which i have
suffered a wrong and unjust system.  but, somehow, i have got to make
both of these things just and right to me.  and exactly as in art one is
only concerned with what a particular thing is at a particular moment to
oneself, so it is also in the ethical evolution of one's character.  i
have got to make everything that has happened to me good for me.  the
plank bed, the loathsome food, the hard ropes shredded into oakum till
one's finger-tips grow dull with pain, the menial offices with which each
day begins and finishes, the harsh orders that routine seems to
necessitate, the dreadful dress that makes sorrow grotesque to look at,
the silence, the solitude, the shame--each and all of these things i have
to transform into a spiritual experience.  there is not a single
degradation of the body which i must not try and make into a
spiritualising of the soul.

i want to get to the point when i shall be able to say quite simply, and
without affectation that the two great turning-points in my life were
when my father sent me to oxford, and when society sent me to prison.  i
will not say that prison is the best thing that could have happened to
me: for that phrase would savour of too great bitterness towards myself.
i would sooner say, or hear it said of me, that i was so typical a child
of my age, that in my perversity, and for that perversity's sake, i
turned the good things of my life to evil, and the evil things of my life
to good.

what is said, however, by myself or by others, matters little.  the
important thing, the thing that lies before me, the thing that i have to
do, if the brief remainder of my days is not to be maimed, marred, and
incomplete, is to absorb into my nature all that has been done to me, to
make it part of me, to accept it without complaint, fear, or reluctance.
the supreme vice is shallowness.  whatever is realised is right.

when first i was put into prison some people advised me to try and forget
who i was.  it was ruinous advice.  it is only by realising what i am
that i have found comfort of any kind.  now i am advised by others to try
on my release to forget that i have ever been in a prison at all.  i know
that would be equally fatal.  it would mean that i would always be
haunted by an intolerable sense of disgrace, and that those things that
are meant for me as much as for anybody else--the beauty of the sun and
moon, the pageant of the seasons, the music of daybreak and the silence
of great nights, the rain falling through the leaves, or the dew creeping
over the grass and making it silver--would all be tainted for me, and
lose their healing power, and their power of communicating joy.  to
regret one's own experiences is to arrest one's own development.  to deny
one's own experiences is to put a lie into the lips of one's own life.  it
is no less than a denial of the soul.

for just as the body absorbs things of all kinds, things common and
unclean no less than those that the priest or a vision has cleansed, and
converts them into swiftness or strength, into the play of beautiful
muscles and the moulding of fair flesh, into the curves and colours of
the hair, the lips, the eye; so the soul in its turn has its nutritive
functions also, and can transform into noble moods of thought and
passions of high import what in itself is base, cruel and degrading; nay,
more, may find in these its most august modes of assertion, and can often
reveal itself most perfectly through what was intended to desecrate or
destroy.

the fact of my having been the common prisoner of a common gaol i must
frankly accept, and, curious as it may seem, one of the things i shall
have to teach myself is not to be ashamed of it.  i must accept it as a
punishment, and if one is ashamed of having been punished, one might just
as well never have been punished at all.  of course there are many things
of which i was convicted that i had not done, but then there are many
things of which i was convicted that i had done, and a still greater
number of things in my life for which i was never indicted at all.  and
as the gods are strange, and punish us for what is good and humane in us
as much as for what is evil and perverse, i must accept the fact that one
is punished for the good as well as for the evil that one does.  i have
no doubt that it is quite right one should be.  it helps one, or should
help one, to realise both, and not to be too conceited about either.  and
if i then am not ashamed of my punishment, as i hope not to be, i shall
be able to think, and walk, and live with freedom.

many men on their release carry their prison about with them into the
air, and hide it as a secret disgrace in their hearts, and at length,
like poor poisoned things, creep into some hole and die.  it is wretched
that they should have to do so, and it is wrong, terribly wrong, of
society that it should force them to do so.  society takes upon itself
the right to inflict appalling punishment on the individual, but it also
has the supreme vice of shallowness, and fails to realise what it has
done.  when the man's punishment is over, it leaves him to himself; that
is to say, it abandons him at the very moment when its highest duty
towards him begins.  it is really ashamed of its own actions, and shuns
those whom it has punished, as people shun a creditor whose debt they
cannot pay, or one on whom they have inflicted an irreparable, an
irremediable wrong.  i can claim on my side that if i realise what i have
suffered, society should realise what it has inflicted on me; and that
there should be no bitterness or hate on either side.

of course i know that from one point of view things will be made
different for me than for others; must indeed, by the very nature of the
case, be made so.  the poor thieves and outcasts who are imprisoned here
with me are in many respects more fortunate than i am.  the little way in
grey city or green field that saw their sin is small; to find those who
know nothing of what they have done they need go no further than a bird
might fly between the twilight and the dawn; but for me the world is
shrivelled to a handsbreadth, and everywhere i turn my name is written on
the rocks in lead.  for i have come, not from obscurity into the
momentary notoriety of crime, but from a sort of eternity of fame to a
sort of eternity of infamy, and sometimes seem to myself to have shown,
if indeed it required showing, that between the famous and the infamous
there is but one step, if as much as one.

still, in the very fact that people will recognise me wherever i go, and
know all about my life, as far as its follies go, i can discern something
good for me.  it will force on me the necessity of again asserting myself
as an artist, and as soon as i possibly can.  if i can produce only one
beautiful work of art i shall be able to rob malice of its venom, and
cowardice of its sneer, and to pluck out the tongue of scorn by the
roots.

and if life be, as it surely is, a problem to me, i am no less a problem
to life.  people must adopt some attitude towards me, and so pass
judgment, both on themselves and me.  i need not say i am not talking of
particular individuals.  the only people i would care to be with now are
artists and people who have suffered: those who know what beauty is, and
those who know what sorrow is: nobody else interests me.  nor am i making
any demands on life.  in all that i have said i am simply concerned with
my own mental attitude towards life as a whole; and i feel that not to be
ashamed of having been punished is one of the first points i must attain
to, for the sake of my own perfection, and because i am so imperfect.

then i must learn how to be happy.  once i knew it, or thought i knew it,
by instinct.  it was always springtime once in my heart.  my temperament
was akin to joy.  i filled my life to the very brim with pleasure, as one
might fill a cup to the very brim with wine.  now i am approaching life
from a completely new standpoint, and even to conceive happiness is often
extremely difficult for me.  i remember during my first term at oxford
reading in pater's _renaissance_--that book which has had such strange
influence over my life--how dante places low in the inferno those who
wilfully live in sadness; and going to the college library and turning to
the passage in the _divine comedy_ where beneath the dreary marsh lie
those who were 'sullen in the sweet air,' saying for ever and ever
through their sighs--

   'tristi fummo
   nell aer dolce che dal sol s'allegra.'

i knew the church condemned _accidia_, but the whole idea seemed to me
quite fantastic, just the sort of sin, i fancied, a priest who knew
nothing about real life would invent.  nor could i understand how dante,
who says that 'sorrow remarries us to god,' could have been so harsh to
those who were enamoured of melancholy, if any such there really were.  i
had no idea that some day this would become to me one of the greatest
temptations of my life.

while i was in wandsworth prison i longed to die.  it was my one desire.
when after two months in the infirmary i was transferred here, and found
myself growing gradually better in physical health, i was filled with
rage.  i determined to commit suicide on the very day on which i left
prison.  after a time that evil mood passed away, and i made up my mind
to live, but to wear gloom as a king wears purple: never to smile again:
to turn whatever house i entered into a house of mourning: to make my
friends walk slowly in sadness with me: to teach them that melancholy is
the true secret of life: to maim them with an alien sorrow: to mar them
with my own pain.  now i feel quite differently.  i see it would be both
ungrateful and unkind of me to pull so long a face that when my friends
came to see me they would have to make their faces still longer in order
to show their sympathy; or, if i desired to entertain them, to invite
them to sit down silently to bitter herbs and funeral baked meats.  i
must learn how to be cheerful and happy.

the last two occasions on which i was allowed to see my friends here, i
tried to be as cheerful as possible, and to show my cheerfulness, in
order to make them some slight return for their trouble in coming all the
way from town to see me.  it is only a slight return, i know, but it is
the one, i feel certain, that pleases them most.  i saw r--- for an hour
on saturday week, and i tried to give the fullest possible expression of
the delight i really felt at our meeting.  and that, in the views and
ideas i am here shaping for myself, i am quite right is shown to me by
the fact that now for the first time since my imprisonment i have a real
desire for life.

there is before me so much to do, that i would regard it as a terrible
tragedy if i died before i was allowed to complete at any rate a little
of it.  i see new developments in art and life, each one of which is a
fresh mode of perfection.  i long to live so that i can explore what is
no less than a new world to me.  do you want to know what this new world
is?  i think you can guess what it is.  it is the world in which i have
been living.  sorrow, then, and all that it teaches one, is my new world.

i used to live entirely for pleasure.  i shunned suffering and sorrow of
every kind.  i hated both.  i resolved to ignore them as far as possible:
to treat them, that is to say, as modes of imperfection.  they were not
part of my scheme of life.  they had no place in my philosophy.  my
mother, who knew life as a whole, used often to quote to me goethe's
lines--written by carlyle in a book he had given her years ago, and
translated by him, i fancy, also:--

   'who never ate his bread in sorrow,
   who never spent the midnight hours
   weeping and waiting for the morrow,--
   he knows you not, ye heavenly powers.'

they were the lines which that noble queen of prussia, whom napoleon
treated with such coarse brutality, used to quote in her humiliation and
exile; they were the lines my mother often quoted in the troubles of her
later life.  i absolutely declined to accept or admit the enormous truth
hidden in them.  i could not understand it.  i remember quite well how i
used to tell her that i did not want to eat my bread in sorrow, or to
pass any night weeping and watching for a more bitter dawn.

i had no idea that it was one of the special things that the fates had in
store for me: that for a whole year of my life, indeed, i was to do
little else.  but so has my portion been meted out to me; and during the
last few months i have, after terrible difficulties and struggles, been
able to comprehend some of the lessons hidden in the heart of pain.
clergymen and people who use phrases without wisdom sometimes talk of
suffering as a mystery.  it is really a revelation.  one discerns things
one never discerned before.  one approaches the whole of history from a
different standpoint.  what one had felt dimly, through instinct, about
art, is intellectually and emotionally realised with perfect clearness of
vision and absolute intensity of apprehension.

i now see that sorrow, being the supreme emotion of which man is capable,
is at once the type and test of all great art.  what the artist is always
looking for is the mode of existence in which soul and body are one and
indivisible: in which the outward is expressive of the inward: in which
form reveals.  of such modes of existence there are not a few: youth and
the arts preoccupied with youth may serve as a model for us at one
moment: at another we may like to think that, in its subtlety and
sensitiveness of impression, its suggestion of a spirit dwelling in
external things and making its raiment of earth and air, of mist and city
alike, and in its morbid sympathy of its moods, and tones, and colours,
modern landscape art is realising for us pictorially what was realised in
such plastic perfection by the greeks.  music, in which all subject is
absorbed in expression and cannot be separated from it, is a complex
example, and a flower or a child a simple example, of what i mean; but
sorrow is the ultimate type both in life and art.

behind joy and laughter there may be a temperament, coarse, hard and
callous.  but behind sorrow there is always sorrow.  pain, unlike
pleasure, wears no mask.  truth in art is not any correspondence between
the essential idea and the accidental existence; it is not the
resemblance of shape to shadow, or of the form mirrored in the crystal to
the form itself; it is no echo coming from a hollow hill, any more than
it is a silver well of water in the valley that shows the moon to the
moon and narcissus to narcissus.  truth in art is the unity of a thing
with itself: the outward rendered expressive of the inward: the soul made
incarnate: the body instinct with spirit.  for this reason there is no
truth comparable to sorrow.  there are times when sorrow seems to me to
be the only truth.  other things may be illusions of the eye or the
appetite, made to blind the one and cloy the other, but out of sorrow
have the worlds been built, and at the birth of a child or a star there
is pain.

more than this, there is about sorrow an intense, an extraordinary
reality.  i have said of myself that i was one who stood in symbolic
relations to the art and culture of my age.  there is not a single
wretched man in this wretched place along with me who does not stand in
symbolic relation to the very secret of life.  for the secret of life is
suffering.  it is what is hidden behind everything.  when we begin to
live, what is sweet is so sweet to us, and what is bitter so bitter, that
we inevitably direct all our desires towards pleasures, and seek not
merely for a 'month or twain to feed on honeycomb,' but for all our years
to taste no other food, ignorant all the while that we may really be
starving the soul.

i remember talking once on this subject to one of the most beautiful
personalities i have ever known: a woman, whose sympathy and noble
kindness to me, both before and since the tragedy of my imprisonment,
have been beyond power and description; one who has really assisted me,
though she does not know it, to bear the burden of my troubles more than
any one else in the whole world has, and all through the mere fact of her
existence, through her being what she is--partly an ideal and partly an
influence: a suggestion of what one might become as well as a real help
towards becoming it; a soul that renders the common air sweet, and makes
what is spiritual seem as simple and natural as sunlight or the sea: one
for whom beauty and sorrow walk hand in hand, and have the same message.
on the occasion of which i am thinking i recall distinctly how i said to
her that there was enough suffering in one narrow london lane to show
that god did not love man, and that wherever there was any sorrow, though
but that of a child, in some little garden weeping over a fault that it
had or had not committed, the whole face of creation was completely
marred.  i was entirely wrong.  she told me so, but i could not believe
her.  i was not in the sphere in which such belief was to be attained to.
now it seems to me that love of some kind is the only possible
explanation of the extraordinary amount of suffering that there is in the
world.  i cannot conceive of any other explanation.  i am convinced that
there is no other, and that if the world has indeed, as i have said, been
built of sorrow, it has been built by the hands of love, because in no
other way could the soul of man, for whom the world was made, reach the
full stature of its perfection.  pleasure for the beautiful body, but
pain for the beautiful soul.

when i say that i am convinced of these things i speak with too much
pride.  far off, like a perfect pearl, one can see the city of god.  it
is so wonderful that it seems as if a child could reach it in a summer's
day.  and so a child could.  but with me and such as me it is different.
one can realise a thing in a single moment, but one loses it in the long
hours that follow with leaden feet.  it is so difficult to keep 'heights
that the soul is competent to gain.'  we think in eternity, but we move
slowly through time; and how slowly time goes with us who lie in prison i
need not tell again, nor of the weariness and despair that creep back
into one's cell, and into the cell of one's heart, with such strange
insistence that one has, as it were, to garnish and sweep one's house for
their coming, as for an unwelcome guest, or a bitter master, or a slave
whose slave it is one's chance or choice to be.

and, though at present my friends may find it a hard thing to believe, it
is true none the less, that for them living in freedom and idleness and
comfort it is more easy to learn the lessons of humility than it is for
me, who begin the day by going down on my knees and washing the floor of
my cell.  for prison life with its endless privations and restrictions
makes one rebellious.  the most terrible thing about it is not that it
breaks one's heart--hearts are made to be broken--but that it turns one's
heart to stone.  one sometimes feels that it is only with a front of
brass and a lip of scorn that one can get through the day at all.  and he
who is in a state of rebellion cannot receive grace, to use the phrase of
which the church is so fond--so rightly fond, i dare say--for in life as
in art the mood of rebellion closes up the channels of the soul, and
shuts out the airs of heaven.  yet i must learn these lessons here, if i
am to learn them anywhere, and must be filled with joy if my feet are on
the right road and my face set towards 'the gate which is called
beautiful,' though i may fall many times in the mire and often in the
mist go astray.

this new life, as through my love of dante i like sometimes to call it,
is of course no new life at all, but simply the continuance, by means of
development, and evolution, of my former life.  i remember when i was at
oxford saying to one of my friends as we were strolling round magdalen's
narrow bird-haunted walks one morning in the year before i took my
degree, that i wanted to eat of the fruit of all the trees in the garden
of the world, and that i was going out into the world with that passion
in my soul.  and so, indeed, i went out, and so i lived.  my only mistake
was that i confined myself so exclusively to the trees of what seemed to
me the sun-lit side of the garden, and shunned the other side for its
shadow and its gloom.  failure, disgrace, poverty, sorrow, despair,
suffering, tears even, the broken words that come from lips in pain,
remorse that makes one walk on thorns, conscience that condemns, self-
abasement that punishes, the misery that puts ashes on its head, the
anguish that chooses sack-cloth for its raiment and into its own drink
puts gall:--all these were things of which i was afraid.  and as i had
determined to know nothing of them, i was forced to taste each of them in
turn, to feed on them, to have for a season, indeed, no other food at
all.

i don't regret for a single moment having lived for pleasure.  i did it
to the full, as one should do everything that one does.  there was no
pleasure i did not experience.  i threw the pearl of my soul into a cup
of wine.  i went down the primrose path to the sound of flutes.  i lived
on honeycomb.  but to have continued the same life would have been wrong
because it would have been limiting.  i had to pass on.  the other half
of the garden had its secrets for me also.  of course all this is
foreshadowed and prefigured in my books.  some of it is in _the happy
prince_, some of it in _the young king_, notably in the passage where the
bishop says to the kneeling boy, 'is not he who made misery wiser than
thou art'? a phrase which when i wrote it seemed to me little more than a
phrase; a great deal of it is hidden away in the note of doom that like a
purple thread runs through the texture of _dorian gray_; in _the critic
as artist_ it is set forth in many colours; in _the soul of man_ it is
written down, and in letters too easy to read; it is one of the refrains
whose recurring _motifs_ make _salome_ so like a piece of music and bind
it together as a ballad; in the prose poem of the man who from the bronze
of the image of the 'pleasure that liveth for a moment' has to make the
image of the 'sorrow that abideth for ever' it is incarnate.  it could
not have been otherwise.  at every single moment of one's life one is
what one is going to be no less than what one has been.  art is a symbol,
because man is a symbol.

it is, if i can fully attain to it, the ultimate realisation of the
artistic life.  for the artistic life is simply self-development.
humility in the artist is his frank acceptance of all experiences, just
as love in the artist is simply the sense of beauty that reveals to the
world its body and its soul.  in _marius the epicurean_ pater seeks to
reconcile the artistic life with the life of religion, in the deep,
sweet, and austere sense of the word.  but marius is little more than a
spectator: an ideal spectator indeed, and one to whom it is given 'to
contemplate the spectacle of life with appropriate emotions,' which
wordsworth defines as the poet's true aim; yet a spectator merely, and
perhaps a little too much occupied with the comeliness of the benches of
the sanctuary to notice that it is the sanctuary of sorrow that he is
gazing at.

i see a far more intimate and immediate connection between the true life
of christ and the true life of the artist; and i take a keen pleasure in
the reflection that long before sorrow had made my days her own and bound
me to her wheel i had written in _the soul of man_ that he who would lead
a christ-like life must be entirely and absolutely himself, and had taken
as my types not merely the shepherd on the hillside and the prisoner in
his cell, but also the painter to whom the world is a pageant and the
poet for whom the world is a song.  i remember saying once to andre gide,
as we sat together in some paris _cafe_, that while meta-physics had but
little real interest for me, and morality absolutely none, there was
nothing that either plato or christ had said that could not be
transferred immediately into the sphere of art and there find its
complete fulfilment.

nor is it merely that we can discern in christ that close union of
personality with perfection which forms the real distinction between the
classical and romantic movement in life, but the very basis of his nature
was the same as that of the nature of the artist--an intense and
flamelike imagination.  he realised in the entire sphere of human
relations that imaginative sympathy which in the sphere of art is the
sole secret of creation.  he understood the leprosy of the leper, the
darkness of the blind, the fierce misery of those who live for pleasure,
the strange poverty of the rich.  some one wrote to me in trouble, 'when
you are not on your pedestal you are not interesting.'  how remote was
the writer from what matthew arnold calls 'the secret of jesus.'  either
would have taught him that whatever happens to another happens to
oneself, and if you want an inscription to read at dawn and at
night-time, and for pleasure or for pain, write up on the walls of your
house in letters for the sun to gild and the moon to silver, 'whatever
happens to oneself happens to another.'

christ's place indeed is with the poets.  his whole conception of
humanity sprang right out of the imagination and can only be realised by
it.  what god was to the pantheist, man was to him.  he was the first to
conceive the divided races as a unity.  before his time there had been
gods and men, and, feeling through the mysticism of sympathy that in
himself each had been made incarnate, he calls himself the son of the one
or the son of the other, according to his mood.  more than any one else
in history he wakes in us that temper of wonder to which romance always
appeals.  there is still something to me almost incredible in the idea of
a young galilean peasant imagining that he could bear on his own
shoulders the burden of the entire world; all that had already been done
and suffered, and all that was yet to be done and suffered: the sins of
nero, of caesar borgia, of alexander vi., and of him who was emperor of
rome and priest of the sun: the sufferings of those whose names are
legion and whose dwelling is among the tombs: oppressed nationalities,
factory children, thieves, people in prison, outcasts, those who are dumb
under oppression and whose silence is heard only of god; and not merely
imagining this but actually achieving it, so that at the present moment
all who come in contact with his personality, even though they may
neither bow to his altar nor kneel before his priest, in some way find
that the ugliness of their sin is taken away and the beauty of their
sorrow revealed to them.

i had said of christ that he ranks with the poets.  that is true.  shelley
and sophocles are of his company.  but his entire life also is the most
wonderful of poems.  for 'pity and terror' there is nothing in the entire
cycle of greek tragedy to touch it.  the absolute purity of the
protagonist raises the entire scheme to a height of romantic art from
which the sufferings of thebes and pelops' line are by their very horror
excluded, and shows how wrong aristotle was when he said in his treatise
on the drama that it would be impossible to bear the spectacle of one
blameless in pain.  nor in aeschylus nor dante, those stern masters of
tenderness, in shakespeare, the most purely human of all the great
artists, in the whole of celtic myth and legend, where the loveliness of
the world is shown through a mist of tears, and the life of a man is no
more than the life of a flower, is there anything that, for sheer
simplicity of pathos wedded and made one with sublimity of tragic effect,
can be said to equal or even approach the last act of christ's passion.
the little supper with his companions, one of whom has already sold him
for a price; the anguish in the quiet moon-lit garden; the false friend
coming close to him so as to betray him with a kiss; the friend who still
believed in him, and on whom as on a rock he had hoped to build a house
of refuge for man, denying him as the bird cried to the dawn; his own
utter loneliness, his submission, his acceptance of everything; and along
with it all such scenes as the high priest of orthodoxy rending his
raiment in wrath, and the magistrate of civil justice calling for water
in the vain hope of cleansing himself of that stain of innocent blood
that makes him the scarlet figure of history; the coronation ceremony of
sorrow, one of the most wonderful things in the whole of recorded time;
the crucifixion of the innocent one before the eyes of his mother and of
the disciple whom he loved; the soldiers gambling and throwing dice for
his clothes; the terrible death by which he gave the world its most
eternal symbol; and his final burial in the tomb of the rich man, his
body swathed in egyptian linen with costly spices and perfumes as though
he had been a king's son.  when one contemplates all this from the point
of view of art alone one cannot but be grateful that the supreme office
of the church should be the playing of the tragedy without the shedding
of blood: the mystical presentation, by means of dialogue and costume and
gesture even, of the passion of her lord; and it is always a source of
pleasure and awe to me to remember that the ultimate survival of the
greek chorus, lost elsewhere to art, is to be found in the servitor
answering the priest at mass.

yet the whole life of christ--so entirely may sorrow and beauty be made
one in their meaning and manifestation--is really an idyll, though it
ends with the veil of the temple being rent, and the darkness coming over
the face of the earth, and the stone rolled to the door of the sepulchre.
one always thinks of him as a young bridegroom with his companions, as
indeed he somewhere describes himself; as a shepherd straying through a
valley with his sheep in search of green meadow or cool stream; as a
singer trying to build out of the music the walls of the city of god; or
as a lover for whose love the whole world was too small.  his miracles
seem to me to be as exquisite as the coming of spring, and quite as
natural.  i see no difficulty at all in believing that such was the charm
of his personality that his mere presence could bring peace to souls in
anguish, and that those who touched his garments or his hands forgot
their pain; or that as he passed by on the highway of life people who had
seen nothing of life's mystery, saw it clearly, and others who had been
deaf to every voice but that of pleasure heard for the first time the
voice of love and found it as 'musical as apollo's lute'; or that evil
passions fled at his approach, and men whose dull unimaginative lives had
been but a mode of death rose as it were from the grave when he called
them; or that when he taught on the hillside the multitude forgot their
hunger and thirst and the cares of this world, and that to his friends
who listened to him as he sat at meat the coarse food seemed delicate,
and the water had the taste of good wine, and the whole house became full
of the odour and sweetness of nard.

renan in his _vie de jesus_--that gracious fifth gospel, the gospel
according to st. thomas, one might call it--says somewhere that christ's
great achievement was that he made himself as much loved after his death
as he had been during his lifetime.  and certainly, if his place is among
the poets, he is the leader of all the lovers.  he saw that love was the
first secret of the world for which the wise men had been looking, and
that it was only through love that one could approach either the heart of
the leper or the feet of god.

and above all, christ is the most supreme of individualists.  humility,
like the artistic, acceptance of all experiences, is merely a mode of
manifestation.  it is man's soul that christ is always looking for.  he
calls it 'god's kingdom,' and finds it in every one.  he compares it to
little things, to a tiny seed, to a handful of leaven, to a pearl.  that
is because one realises one's soul only by getting rid of all alien
passions, all acquired culture, and all external possessions, be they
good or evil.

i bore up against everything with some stubbornness of will and much
rebellion of nature, till i had absolutely nothing left in the world but
one thing.  i had lost my name, my position, my happiness, my freedom, my
wealth.  i was a prisoner and a pauper.  but i still had my children
left.  suddenly they were taken away from me by the law.  it was a blow
so appalling that i did not know what to do, so i flung myself on my
knees, and bowed my head, and wept, and said, 'the body of a child is as
the body of the lord: i am not worthy of either.'  that moment seemed to
save me.  i saw then that the only thing for me was to accept everything.
since then--curious as it will no doubt sound--i have been happier.  it
was of course my soul in its ultimate essence that i had reached.  in
many ways i had been its enemy, but i found it waiting for me as a
friend.  when one comes in contact with the soul it makes one simple as a
child, as christ said one should be.

it is tragic how few people ever 'possess their souls' before they die.
'nothing is more rare in any man,' says emerson, 'than an act of his
own.'  it is quite true.  most people are other people.  their thoughts
are some one else's opinions, their lives a mimicry, their passions a
quotation.  christ was not merely the supreme individualist, but he was
the first individualist in history.  people have tried to make him out an
ordinary philanthropist, or ranked him as an altruist with the scientific
and sentimental.  but he was really neither one nor the other.  pity he
has, of course, for the poor, for those who are shut up in prisons, for
the lowly, for the wretched; but he has far more pity for the rich, for
the hard hedonists, for those who waste their freedom in becoming slaves
to things, for those who wear soft raiment and live in kings' houses.
riches and pleasure seemed to him to be really greater tragedies than
poverty or sorrow.  and as for altruism, who knew better than he that it
is vocation not volition that determines us, and that one cannot gather
grapes of thorns or figs from thistles?

to live for others as a definite self-conscious aim was not his creed.  it
was not the basis of his creed.  when he says, 'forgive your enemies,' it
is not for the sake of the enemy, but for one's own sake that he says so,
and because love is more beautiful than hate.  in his own entreaty to the
young man, 'sell all that thou hast and give to the poor,' it is not of
the state of the poor that he is thinking but of the soul of the young
man, the soul that wealth was marring.  in his view of life he is one
with the artist who knows that by the inevitable law of self-perfection,
the poet must sing, and the sculptor think in bronze, and the painter
make the world a mirror for his moods, as surely and as certainly as the
hawthorn must blossom in spring, and the corn turn to gold at harvest-
time, and the moon in her ordered wanderings change from shield to
sickle, and from sickle to shield.

but while christ did not say to men, 'live for others,' he pointed out
that there was no difference at all between the lives of others and one's
own life.  by this means he gave to man an extended, a titan personality.
since his coming the history of each separate individual is, or can be
made, the history of the world.  of course, culture has intensified the
personality of man.  art has made us myriad-minded.  those who have the
artistic temperament go into exile with dante and learn how salt is the
bread of others, and how steep their stairs; they catch for a moment the
serenity and calm of goethe, and yet know but too well that baudelaire
cried to god--

   'o seigneur, donnez moi la force et le courage
   de contempler mon corps et mon coeur sans degout.'

out of shakespeare's sonnets they draw, to their own hurt it may be, the
secret of his love and make it their own; they look with new eyes on
modern life, because they have listened to one of chopin's nocturnes, or
handled greek things, or read the story of the passion of some dead man
for some dead woman whose hair was like threads of fine gold, and whose
mouth was as a pomegranate.  but the sympathy of the artistic temperament
is necessarily with what has found expression.  in words or in colours,
in music or in marble, behind the painted masks of an aeschylean play, or
through some sicilian shepherds' pierced and jointed reeds, the man and
his message must have been revealed.

to the artist, expression is the only mode under which he can conceive
life at all.  to him what is dumb is dead.  but to christ it was not so.
with a width and wonder of imagination that fills one almost with awe, he
took the entire world of the inarticulate, the voiceless world of pain,
as his kingdom, and made of himself its eternal mouthpiece.  those of
whom i have spoken, who are dumb under oppression, and 'whose silence is
heard only of god,' he chose as his brothers.  he sought to become eyes
to the blind, ears to the deaf, and a cry in the lips of those whose
tongues had been tied.  his desire was to be to the myriads who had found
no utterance a very trumpet through which they might call to heaven.  and
feeling, with the artistic nature of one to whom suffering and sorrow
were modes through which he could realise his conception of the
beautiful, that an idea is of no value till it becomes incarnate and is
made an image, he made of himself the image of the man of sorrows, and as
such has fascinated and dominated art as no greek god ever succeeded in
doing.

for the greek gods, in spite of the white and red of their fair fleet
limbs, were not really what they appeared to be.  the curved brow of
apollo was like the sun's disc crescent over a hill at dawn, and his feet
were as the wings of the morning, but he himself had been cruel to
marsyas and had made niobe childless.  in the steel shields of athena's
eyes there had been no pity for arachne; the pomp and peacocks of hera
were all that was really noble about her; and the father of the gods
himself had been too fond of the daughters of men.  the two most deeply
suggestive figures of greek mythology were, for religion, demeter, an
earth goddess, not one of the olympians, and for art, dionysus, the son
of a mortal woman to whom the moment of his birth had proved also the
moment of her death.

but life itself from its lowliest and most humble sphere produced one far
more marvellous than the mother of proserpina or the son of semele.  out
of the carpenter's shop at nazareth had come a personality infinitely
greater than any made by myth and legend, and one, strangely enough,
destined to reveal to the world the mystical meaning of wine and the real
beauties of the lilies of the field as none, either on cithaeron or at
enna, had ever done.

the song of isaiah, 'he is despised and rejected of men, a man of sorrows
and acquainted with grief: and we hid as it were our faces from him,' had
seemed to him to prefigure himself, and in him the prophecy was
fulfilled.  we must not be afraid of such a phrase.  every single work of
art is the fulfilment of a prophecy: for every work of art is the
conversion of an idea into an image.  every single human being should be
the fulfilment of a prophecy: for every human being should be the
realisation of some ideal, either in the mind of god or in the mind of
man.  christ found the type and fixed it, and the dream of a virgilian
poet, either at jerusalem or at babylon, became in the long progress of
the centuries incarnate in him for whom the world was waiting.

to me one of the things in history the most to be regretted is that the
christ's own renaissance, which has produced the cathedral at chartres,
the arthurian cycle of legends, the life of st. francis of assisi, the
art of giotto, and dante's _divine comedy_, was not allowed to develop on
its own lines, but was interrupted and spoiled by the dreary classical
renaissance that gave us petrarch, and raphael's frescoes, and palladian
architecture, and formal french tragedy, and st. paul's cathedral, and
pope's poetry, and everything that is made from without and by dead
rules, and does not spring from within through some spirit informing it.
but wherever there is a romantic movement in art there somehow, and under
some form, is christ, or the soul of christ.  he is in _romeo and
juliet_, in the _winter's tale_, in provencal poetry, in the _ancient
mariner_, in _la belle dame sans merci_, and in chatterton's _ballad of
charity_.

we owe to him the most diverse things and people.  hugo's _les
miserables_, baudelaire's _fleurs du mal_, the note of pity in russian
novels, verlaine and verlaine's poems, the stained glass and tapestries
and the quattro-cento work of burne-jones and morris, belong to him no
less than the tower of giotto, lancelot and guinevere, tannhauser, the
troubled romantic marbles of michael angelo, pointed architecture, and
the love of children and flowers--for both of which, indeed, in classical
art there was but little place, hardly enough for them to grow or play
in, but which, from the twelfth century down to our own day, have been
continually making their appearances in art, under various modes and at
various times, coming fitfully and wilfully, as children, as flowers, are
apt to do: spring always seeming to one as if the flowers had been in
hiding, and only came out into the sun because they were afraid that
grown up people would grow tired of looking for them and give up the
search; and the life of a child being no more than an april day on which
there is both rain and sun for the narcissus.

it is the imaginative quality of christ's own nature that makes him this
palpitating centre of romance.  the strange figures of poetic drama and
ballad are made by the imagination of others, but out of his own
imagination entirely did jesus of nazareth create himself.  the cry of
isaiah had really no more to do with his coming than the song of the
nightingale has to do with the rising of the moon--no more, though
perhaps no less.  he was the denial as well as the affirmation of
prophecy.  for every expectation that he fulfilled there was another that
he destroyed.  'in all beauty,' says bacon, 'there is some strangeness of
proportion,' and of those who are born of the spirit--of those, that is
to say, who like himself are dynamic forces--christ says that they are
like the wind that 'bloweth where it listeth, and no man can tell whence
it cometh and whither it goeth.'  that is why he is so fascinating to
artists.  he has all the colour elements of life: mystery, strangeness,
pathos, suggestion, ecstasy, love.  he appeals to the temper of wonder,
and creates that mood in which alone he can be understood.

and to me it is a joy to remember that if he is 'of imagination all
compact,' the world itself is of the same substance.  i said in _dorian
gray_ that the great sins of the world take place in the brain: but it is
in the brain that everything takes place.  we know now that we do not see
with the eyes or hear with the ears.  they are really channels for the
transmission, adequate or inadequate, of sense impressions.  it is in the
brain that the poppy is red, that the apple is odorous, that the skylark
sings.

of late i have been studying with diligence the four prose poems about
christ.  at christmas i managed to get hold of a greek testament, and
every morning, after i had cleaned my cell and polished my tins, i read a
little of the gospels, a dozen verses taken by chance anywhere.  it is a
delightful way of opening the day.  every one, even in a turbulent, ill-
disciplined life, should do the same.  endless repetition, in and out of
season, has spoiled for us the freshness, the naivete, the simple
romantic charm of the gospels.  we hear them read far too often and far
too badly, and all repetition is anti-spiritual.  when one returns to the
greek; it is like going into a garden of lilies out of some, narrow and
dark house.

and to me, the pleasure is doubled by the reflection that it is extremely
probable that we have the actual terms, the _ipsissima verba_, used by
christ.  it was always supposed that christ talked in aramaic.  even
renan thought so.  but now we know that the galilean peasants, like the
irish peasants of our own day, were bilingual, and that greek was the
ordinary language of intercourse all over palestine, as indeed all over
the eastern world.  i never liked the idea that we knew of christ's own
words only through a translation of a translation.  it is a delight to me
to think that as far as his conversation was concerned, charmides might
have listened to him, and socrates reasoned with him, and plato
understood him: that he really said [greek text], that when he thought of
the lilies of the field and how they neither toil nor spin, his absolute
expression was [greek text], and that his last word when he cried out 'my
life has been completed, has reached its fulfilment, has been perfected,'
was exactly as st. john tells us it was: [greek text]--no more.

while in reading the gospels--particularly that of st. john himself, or
whatever early gnostic took his name and mantle--i see the continual
assertion of the imagination as the basis of all spiritual and material
life, i see also that to christ imagination was simply a form of love,
and that to him love was lord in the fullest meaning of the phrase.  some
six weeks ago i was allowed by the doctor to have white bread to eat
instead of the coarse black or brown bread of ordinary prison fare.  it
is a great delicacy.  it will sound strange that dry bread could possibly
be a delicacy to any one.  to me it is so much so that at the close of
each meal i carefully eat whatever crumbs may be left on my tin plate, or
have fallen on the rough towel that one uses as a cloth so as not to soil
one's table; and i do so not from hunger--i get now quite sufficient
food--but simply in order that nothing should be wasted of what is given
to me.  so one should look on love.

christ, like all fascinating personalities, had the power of not merely
saying beautiful things himself, but of making other people say beautiful
things to him; and i love the story st. mark tells us about the greek
woman, who, when as a trial of her faith he said to her that he could not
give her the bread of the children of israel, answered him that the
little dogs--([greek text], 'little dogs' it should be rendered)--who are
under the table eat of the crumbs that the children let fall.  most
people live for love and admiration.  but it is by love and admiration
that we should live.  if any love is shown us we should recognise that we
are quite unworthy of it.  nobody is worthy to be loved.  the fact that
god loves man shows us that in the divine order of ideal things it is
written that eternal love is to be given to what is eternally unworthy.
or if that phrase seems to be a bitter one to bear, let us say that every
one is worthy of love, except him who thinks that he is.  love is a
sacrament that should be taken kneeling, and _domine, non sum dignus_
should be on the lips and in the hearts of those who receive it.

if ever i write again, in the sense of producing artistic work, there are
just two subjects on which and through which i desire to express myself:
one is 'christ as the precursor of the romantic movement in life': the
other is 'the artistic life considered in its relation to conduct.'  the
first is, of course, intensely fascinating, for i see in christ not
merely the essentials of the supreme romantic type, but all the
accidents, the wilfulnesses even, of the romantic temperament also.  he
was the first person who ever said to people that they should live
'flower-like lives.'  he fixed the phrase.  he took children as the type
of what people should try to become.  he held them up as examples to
their elders, which i myself have always thought the chief use of
children, if what is perfect should have a use.  dante describes the soul
of a man as coming from the hand of god 'weeping and laughing like a
little child,' and christ also saw that the soul of each one should be _a
guisa di fanciulla che piangendo e ridendo pargoleggia_.  he felt that
life was changeful, fluid, active, and that to allow it to be stereotyped
into any form was death.  he saw that people should not be too serious
over material, common interests: that to be unpractical was to be a great
thing: that one should not bother too much over affairs.  the birds
didn't, why should man?  he is charming when he says, 'take no thought
for the morrow; is not the soul more than meat? is not the body more than
raiment?'  a greek might have used the latter phrase.  it is full of
greek feeling.  but only christ could have said both, and so summed up
life perfectly for us.

his morality is all sympathy, just what morality should be.  if the only
thing that he ever said had been, 'her sins are forgiven her because she
loved much,' it would have been worth while dying to have said it.  his
justice is all poetical justice, exactly what justice should be.  the
beggar goes to heaven because he has been unhappy.  i cannot conceive a
better reason for his being sent there.  the people who work for an hour
in the vineyard in the cool of the evening receive just as much reward as
those who have toiled there all day long in the hot sun.  why shouldn't
they?  probably no one deserved anything.  or perhaps they were a
different kind of people.  christ had no patience with the dull lifeless
mechanical systems that treat people as if they were things, and so treat
everybody alike: for him there were no laws: there were exceptions
merely, as if anybody, or anything, for that matter, was like aught else
in the world!

that which is the very keynote of romantic art was to him the proper
basis of natural life.  he saw no other basis.  and when they brought him
one, taken in the very act of sin and showed him her sentence written in
the law, and asked him what was to be done, he wrote with his finger on
the ground as though he did not hear them, and finally, when they pressed
him again, looked up and said, 'let him of you who has never sinned be
the first to throw the stone at her.'  it was worth while living to have
said that.

like all poetical natures he loved ignorant people.  he knew that in the
soul of one who is ignorant there is always room for a great idea.  but
he could not stand stupid people, especially those who are made stupid by
education: people who are full of opinions not one of which they even
understand, a peculiarly modern type, summed up by christ when he
describes it as the type of one who has the key of knowledge, cannot use
it himself, and does not allow other people to use it, though it may be
made to open the gate of god's kingdom.  his chief war was against the
philistines.  that is the war every child of light has to wage.
philistinism was the note of the age and community in which he lived.  in
their heavy inaccessibility to ideas, their dull respectability, their
tedious orthodoxy, their worship of vulgar success, their entire
preoccupation with the gross materialistic side of life, and their
ridiculous estimate of themselves and their importance, the jews of
jerusalem in christ's day were the exact counterpart of the british
philistine of our own.  christ mocked at the 'whited sepulchre' of
respectability, and fixed that phrase for ever.  he treated worldly
success as a thing absolutely to be despised.  he saw nothing in it at
all.  he looked on wealth as an encumbrance to a man.  he would not hear
of life being sacrificed to any system of thought or morals.  he pointed
out that forms and ceremonies were made for man, not man for forms and
ceremonies.  he took sabbatarianism as a type of the things that should
be set at nought.  the cold philanthropies, the ostentatious public
charities, the tedious formalisms so dear to the middle-class mind, he
exposed with utter and relentless scorn.  to us, what is termed orthodoxy
is merely a facile unintelligent acquiescence; but to them, and in their
hands, it was a terrible and paralysing tyranny.  christ swept it aside.
he showed that the spirit alone was of value.  he took a keen pleasure in
pointing out to them that though they were always reading the law and the
prophets, they had not really the smallest idea of what either of them
meant.  in opposition to their tithing of each separate day into the
fixed routine of prescribed duties, as they tithe mint and rue, he
preached the enormous importance of living completely for the moment.

those whom he saved from their sins are saved simply for beautiful
moments in their lives.  mary magdalen, when she sees christ, breaks the
rich vase of alabaster that one of her seven lovers had given her, and
spills the odorous spices over his tired dusty feet, and for that one
moment's sake sits for ever with ruth and beatrice in the tresses of the
snow-white rose of paradise.  all that christ says to us by the way of a
little warning is that every moment should be beautiful, that the soul
should always be ready for the coming of the bridegroom, always waiting
for the voice of the lover, philistinism being simply that side of man's
nature that is not illumined by the imagination.  he sees all the lovely
influences of life as modes of light: the imagination itself is the world
of light.  the world is made by it, and yet the world cannot understand
it: that is because the imagination is simply a manifestation of love,
and it is love and the capacity for it that distinguishes one human being
from another.

but it is when he deals with a sinner that christ is most romantic, in
the sense of most real.  the world had always loved the saint as being
the nearest possible approach to the perfection of god.  christ, through
some divine instinct in him, seems to have always loved the sinner as
being the nearest possible approach to the perfection of man.  his
primary desire was not to reform people, any more than his primary desire
was to a relieve suffering.  to turn an interesting thief into a tedious
honest man was not his aim.  he would have thought little of the
prisoners' aid society and other modern movements of the kind.  the
conversion of a publican into a pharisee would not have seemed to him a
great achievement.  but in a manner not yet understood of the world he
regarded sin and suffering as being in themselves beautiful holy things
and modes of perfection.

it seems a very dangerous idea.  it is--all great ideas are dangerous.
that it was christ's creed admits of no doubt.  that it is the true creed
i don't doubt myself.

of course the sinner must repent.  but why?  simply because otherwise he
would be unable to realise what he had done.  the moment of repentance is
the moment of initiation.  more than that: it is the means by which one
alters one's past.  the greeks thought that impossible.  they often say
in their gnomic aphorisms, 'even the gods cannot alter the past.'  christ
showed that the commonest sinner could do it, that it was the one thing
he could do.  christ, had he been asked, would have said--i feel quite
certain about it--that the moment the prodigal son fell on his knees and
wept, he made his having wasted his substance with harlots, his swine-
herding and hungering for the husks they ate, beautiful and holy moments
in his life.  it is difficult for most people to grasp the idea.  i dare
say one has to go to prison to understand it.  if so, it may be worth
while going to prison.

there is something so unique about christ.  of course just as there are
false dawns before the dawn itself, and winter days so full of sudden
sunlight that they will cheat the wise crocus into squandering its gold
before its time, and make some foolish bird call to its mate to build on
barren boughs, so there were christians before christ.  for that we
should be grateful.  the unfortunate thing is that there have been none
since.  i make one exception, st. francis of assisi.  but then god had
given him at his birth the soul of a poet, as he himself when quite young
had in mystical marriage taken poverty as his bride: and with the soul of
a poet and the body of a beggar he found the way to perfection not
difficult.  he understood christ, and so he became like him.  we do not
require the liber conformitatum to teach us that the life of st. francis
was the true _imitatio christi_, a poem compared to which the book of
that name is merely prose.

indeed, that is the charm about christ, when all is said: he is just like
a work of art.  he does not really teach one anything, but by being
brought into his presence one becomes something.  and everybody is
predestined to his presence.  once at least in his life each man walks
with christ to emmaus.

as regards the other subject, the relation of the artistic life to
conduct, it will no doubt seem strange to you that i should select it.
people point to reading gaol and say, 'that is where the artistic life
leads a man.'  well, it might lead to worse places.  the more mechanical
people to whom life is a shrewd speculation depending on a careful
calculation of ways and means, always know where they are going, and go
there.  they start with the ideal desire of being the parish beadle, and
in whatever sphere they are placed they succeed in being the parish
beadle and no more.  a man whose desire is to be something separate from
himself, to be a member of parliament, or a successful grocer, or a
prominent solicitor, or a judge, or something equally tedious, invariably
succeeds in being what he wants to be.  that is his punishment.  those
who want a mask have to wear it.

but with the dynamic forces of life, and those in whom those dynamic
forces become incarnate, it is different.  people whose desire is solely
for self-realisation never know where they are going.  they can't know.
in one sense of the word it is of course necessary, as the greek oracle
said, to know oneself: that is the first achievement of knowledge.  but
to recognise that the soul of a man is unknowable, is the ultimate
achievement of wisdom.  the final mystery is oneself.  when one has
weighed the sun in the balance, and measured the steps of the moon, and
mapped out the seven heavens star by star, there still remains oneself.
who can calculate the orbit of his own soul?  when the son went out to
look for his father's asses, he did not know that a man of god was
waiting for him with the very chrism of coronation, and that his own soul
was already the soul of a king.

i hope to live long enough and to produce work of such a character that i
shall be able at the end of my days to say, 'yes! this is just where the
artistic life leads a man!'  two of the most perfect lives i have come
across in my own experience are the lives of verlaine and of prince
kropotkin: both of them men who have passed years in prison: the first,
the one christian poet since dante; the other, a man with a soul of that
beautiful white christ which seems coming out of russia.  and for the
last seven or eight months, in spite of a succession of great troubles
reaching me from the outside world almost without intermission, i have
been placed in direct contact with a new spirit working in this prison
through man and things, that has helped me beyond any possibility of
expression in words: so that while for the first year of my imprisonment
i did nothing else, and can remember doing nothing else, but wring my
hands in impotent despair, and say, 'what an ending, what an appalling
ending!' now i try to say to myself, and sometimes when i am not
torturing myself do really and sincerely say, 'what a beginning, what a
wonderful beginning!'  it may really be so.  it may become so.  if it
does i shall owe much to this new personality that has altered every
man's life in this place.

you may realise it when i say that had i been released last may, as i
tried to be, i would have left this place loathing it and every official
in it with a bitterness of hatred that would have poisoned my life.  i
have had a year longer of imprisonment, but humanity has been in the
prison along with us all, and now when i go out i shall always remember
great kindnesses that i have received here from almost everybody, and on
the day of my release i shall give many thanks to many people, and ask to
be remembered by them in turn.

the prison style is absolutely and entirely wrong.  i would give anything
to be able to alter it when i go out.  i intend to try.  but there is
nothing in the world so wrong but that the spirit of humanity, which is
the spirit of love, the spirit of the christ who is not in churches, may
make it, if not right, at least possible to be borne without too much
bitterness of heart.

i know also that much is waiting for me outside that is very delightful,
from what st. francis of assisi calls 'my brother the wind, and my sister
the rain,' lovely things both of them, down to the shop-windows and
sunsets of great cities.  if i made a list of all that still remains to
me, i don't know where i should stop: for, indeed, god made the world
just as much for me as for any one else.  perhaps i may go out with
something that i had not got before.  i need not tell you that to me
reformations in morals are as meaningless and vulgar as reformations in
theology.  but while to propose to be a better man is a piece of
unscientific cant, to have become a deeper man is the privilege of those
who have suffered.  and such i think i have become.

if after i am free a friend of mine gave a feast, and did not invite me
to it, i should not mind a bit.  i can be perfectly happy by myself.  with
freedom, flowers, books, and the moon, who could not be perfectly happy?
besides, feasts are not for me any more.  i have given too many to care
about them.  that side of life is over for me, very fortunately, i dare
say.  but if after i am free a friend of mine had a sorrow and refused to
allow me to share it, i should feel it most bitterly.  if he shut the
doors of the house of mourning against me, i would come back again and
again and beg to be admitted, so that i might share in what i was
entitled to share in.  if he thought me unworthy, unfit to weep with him,
i should feel it as the most poignant humiliation, as the most terrible
mode in which disgrace could be inflicted on me.  but that could not be.
i have a right to share in sorrow, and he who can look at the loveliness
of the world and share its sorrow, and realise something of the wonder of
both, is in immediate contact with divine things, and has got as near to
god's secret as any one can get.

perhaps there may come into my art also, no less than into my life, a
still deeper note, one of greater unity of passion, and directness of
impulse.  not width but intensity is the true aim of modern art.  we are
no longer in art concerned with the type.  it is with the exception that
we have to do.  i cannot put my sufferings into any form they took, i
need hardly say.  art only begins where imitation ends, but something
must come into my work, of fuller memory of words perhaps, of richer
cadences, of more curious effects, of simpler architectural order, of
some aesthetic quality at any rate.

when marsyas was 'torn from the scabbard of his limbs'--_della vagina
della membre sue_, to use one of dante's most terrible tacitean
phrases--he had no more song, the greek said.  apollo had been victor.
the lyre had vanquished the reed.  but perhaps the greeks were mistaken.
i hear in much modern art the cry of marsyas.  it is bitter in
baudelaire, sweet and plaintive in lamartine, mystic in verlaine.  it is
in the deferred resolutions of chopin's music.  it is in the discontent
that haunts burne-jones's women.  even matthew arnold, whose song of
callicles tells of 'the triumph of the sweet persuasive lyre,' and the
'famous final victory,' in such a clear note of lyrical beauty, has not a
little of it; in the troubled undertone of doubt and distress that haunts
his verses, neither goethe nor wordsworth could help him, though he
followed each in turn, and when he seeks to mourn for _thyrsis_ or to
sing of the _scholar gipsy_, it is the reed that he has to take for the
rendering of his strain.  but whether or not the phrygian faun was
silent, i cannot be.  expression is as necessary to me as leaf and
blossoms are to the black branches of the trees that show themselves
above the prison walls and are so restless in the wind.  between my art
and the world there is now a wide gulf, but between art and myself there
is none.  i hope at least that there is none.

to each of us different fates are meted out.  my lot has been one of
public infamy, of long imprisonment, of misery, of ruin, of disgrace, but
i am not worthy of it--not yet, at any rate.  i remember that i used to
say that i thought i could bear a real tragedy if it came to me with
purple pall and a mask of noble sorrow, but that the dreadful thing about
modernity was that it put tragedy into the raiment of comedy, so that the
great realities seemed commonplace or grotesque or lacking in style.  it
is quite true about modernity.  it has probably always been true about
actual life.  it is said that all martyrdoms seemed mean to the looker
on.  the nineteenth century is no exception to the rule.

everything about my tragedy has been hideous, mean, repellent, lacking in
style; our very dress makes us grotesque.  we are the zanies of sorrow.
we are clowns whose hearts are broken.  we are specially designed to
appeal to the sense of humour.  on november 13th, 1895, i was brought
down here from london.  from two o'clock till half-past two on that day i
had to stand on the centre platform of clapham junction in convict dress,
and handcuffed, for the world to look at.  i had been taken out of the
hospital ward without a moment's notice being given to me.  of all
possible objects i was the most grotesque.  when people saw me they
laughed.  each train as it came up swelled the audience.  nothing could
exceed their amusement.  that was, of course, before they knew who i was.
as soon as they had been informed they laughed still more.  for half an
hour i stood there in the grey november rain surrounded by a jeering mob.

for a year after that was done to me i wept every day at the same hour
and for the same space of time.  that is not such a tragic thing as
possibly it sounds to you.  to those who are in prison tears are a part
of every day's experience.  a day in prison on which one does not weep is
a day on which one's heart is hard, not a day on which one's heart is
happy.

well, now i am really beginning to feel more regret for the people who
laughed than for myself.  of course when they saw me i was not on my
pedestal, i was in the pillory.  but it is a very unimaginative nature
that only cares for people on their pedestals.  a pedestal may be a very
unreal thing.  a pillory is a terrific reality.  they should have known
also how to interpret sorrow better.  i have said that behind sorrow
there is always sorrow.  it were wiser still to say that behind sorrow
there is always a soul.  and to mock at a soul in pain is a dreadful
thing.  in the strangely simple economy of the world people only get what
they give, and to those who have not enough imagination to penetrate the
mere outward of things, and feel pity, what pity can be given save that
of scorn?

i write this account of the mode of my being transferred here simply that
it should be realised how hard it has been for me to get anything out of
my punishment but bitterness and despair.  i have, however, to do it, and
now and then i have moments of submission and acceptance.  all the spring
may be hidden in the single bud, and the low ground nest of the lark may
hold the joy that is to herald the feet of many rose-red dawns.  so
perhaps whatever beauty of life still remains to me is contained in some
moment of surrender, abasement, and humiliation.  i can, at any rate,
merely proceed on the lines of my own development, and, accepting all
that has happened to me, make myself worthy of it.

people used to say of me that i was too individualistic.  i must be far
more of an individualist than ever i was.  i must get far more out of
myself than ever i got, and ask far less of the world than ever i asked.
indeed, my ruin came not from too great individualism of life, but from
too little.  the one disgraceful, unpardonable, and to all time
contemptible action of my life was to allow myself to appeal to society
for help and protection.  to have made such an appeal would have been
from the individualist point of view bad enough, but what excuse can
there ever be put forward for having made it?  of course once i had put
into motion the forces of society, society turned on me and said, 'have
you been living all this time in defiance of my laws, and do you now
appeal to those laws for protection?  you shall have those laws exercised
to the full.  you shall abide by what you have appealed to.'  the result
is i am in gaol.  certainly no man ever fell so ignobly, and by such
ignoble instruments, as i did.

the philistine element in life is not the failure to understand art.
charming people, such as fishermen, shepherds, ploughboys, peasants and
the like, know nothing about art, and are the very salt of the earth.  he
is the philistine who upholds and aids the heavy, cumbrous, blind,
mechanical forces of society, and who does not recognise dynamic force
when he meets it either in a man or a movement.

people thought it dreadful of me to have entertained at dinner the evil
things of life, and to have found pleasure in their company.  but then,
from the point of view through which i, as an artist in life, approach
them they were delightfully suggestive and stimulating.  the danger was
half the excitement. . . . my business as an artist was with ariel.  i
set myself to wrestle with caliban. . . .

a great friend of mine--a friend of ten years' standing--came to see me
some time ago, and told me that he did not believe a single word of what
was said against me, and wished me to know that he considered me quite
innocent, and the victim of a hideous plot.  i burst into tears at what
he said, and told him that while there was much amongst the definite
charges that was quite untrue and transferred to me by revolting malice,
still that my life had been full of perverse pleasures, and that unless
he accepted that as a fact about me and realised it to the full i could
not possibly be friends with him any more, or ever be in his company.  it
was a terrible shock to him, but we are friends, and i have not got his
friendship on false pretences.

emotional forces, as i say somewhere in _intentions_, are as limited in
extent and duration as the forces of physical energy.  the little cup
that is made to hold so much can hold so much and no more, though all the
purple vats of burgundy be filled with wine to the brim, and the treaders
stand knee-deep in the gathered grapes of the stony vineyards of spain.
there is no error more common than that of thinking that those who are
the causes or occasions of great tragedies share in the feelings suitable
to the tragic mood: no error more fatal than expecting it of them.  the
martyr in his 'shirt of flame' may be looking on the face of god, but to
him who is piling the faggots or loosening the logs for the blast the
whole scene is no more than the slaying of an ox is to the butcher, or
the felling of a tree to the charcoal burner in the forest, or the fall
of a flower to one who is mowing down the grass with a scythe.  great
passions are for the great of soul, and great events can be seen only by
those who are on a level with them.

* * * * *

i know of nothing in all drama more incomparable from the point of view
of art, nothing more suggestive in its subtlety of observation, than
shakespeare's drawing of rosencrantz and guildenstern.  they are hamlet's
college friends.  they have been his companions.  they bring with them
memories of pleasant days together.  at the moment when they come across
him in the play he is staggering under the weight of a burden intolerable
to one of his temperament.  the dead have come armed out of the grave to
impose on him a mission at once too great and too mean for him.  he is a
dreamer, and he is called upon to act.  he has the nature of the poet,
and he is asked to grapple with the common complexity of cause and
effect, with life in its practical realisation, of which he knows
nothing, not with life in its ideal essence, of which he knows so much.
he has no conception of what to do, and his folly is to feign folly.
brutus used madness as a cloak to conceal the sword of his purpose, the
dagger of his will, but the hamlet madness is a mere mask for the hiding
of weakness.  in the making of fancies and jests he sees a chance of
delay.  he keeps playing with action as an artist plays with a theory.  he
makes himself the spy of his proper actions, and listening to his own
words knows them to be but 'words, words, words.'  instead of trying to
be the hero of his own history, he seeks to be the spectator of his own
tragedy.  he disbelieves in everything, including himself, and yet his
doubt helps him not, as it comes not from scepticism but from a divided
will.

of all this guildenstern and rosencrantz realise nothing.  they bow and
smirk and smile, and what the one says the other echoes with sickliest
intonation.  when, at last, by means of the play within the play, and the
puppets in their dalliance, hamlet 'catches the conscience' of the king,
and drives the wretched man in terror from his throne, guildenstern and
rosencrantz see no more in his conduct than a rather painful breach of
court etiquette.  that is as far as they can attain to in 'the
contemplation of the spectacle of life with appropriate emotions.'  they
are close to his very secret and know nothing of it.  nor would there be
any use in telling them.  they are the little cups that can hold so much
and no more.  towards the close it is suggested that, caught in a cunning
spring set for another, they have met, or may meet, with a violent and
sudden death.  but a tragic ending of this kind, though touched by
hamlet's humour with something of the surprise and justice of comedy, is
really not for such as they.  they never die.  horatio, who in order to
'report hamlet and his cause aright to the unsatisfied,'

   'absents him from felicity a while,
   and in this harsh world draws his breath in pain,'

dies, but guildenstern and rosencrantz are as immortal as angelo and
tartuffe, and should rank with them.  they are what modern life has
contributed to the antique ideal of friendship.  he who writes a new _de
amicitia_ must find a niche for them, and praise them in tusculan prose.
they are types fixed for all time.  to censure them would show 'a lack of
appreciation.'  they are merely out of their sphere: that is all.  in
sublimity of soul there is no contagion.  high thoughts and high emotions
are by their very existence isolated.

* * * * *

i am to be released, if all goes well with me, towards the end of may,
and hope to go at once to some little sea-side village abroad with r---
and m---.

the sea, as euripides says in one of his plays about iphigeneia, washes
away the stains and wounds of the world.

i hope to be at least a month with my friends, and to gain peace and
balance, and a less troubled heart, and a sweeter mood.  i have a strange
longing for the great simple primeval things, such as the sea, to me no
less of a mother than the earth.  it seems to me that we all look at
nature too much, and live with her too little.  i discern great sanity in
the greek attitude.  they never chattered about sunsets, or discussed
whether the shadows on the grass were really mauve or not.  but they saw
that the sea was for the swimmer, and the sand for the feet of the
runner.  they loved the trees for the shadow that they cast, and the
forest for its silence at noon.  the vineyard-dresser wreathed his hair
with ivy that he might keep off the rays of the sun as he stooped over
the young shoots, and for the artist and the athlete, the two types that
greece gave us, they plaited with garlands the leaves of the bitter
laurel and of the wild parsley, which else had been of no service to men.

we call ours a utilitarian age, and we do not know the uses of any single
thing.  we have forgotten that water can cleanse, and fire purify, and
that the earth is mother to us all.  as a consequence our art is of the
moon and plays with shadows, while greek art is of the sun and deals
directly with things.  i feel sure that in elemental forces there is
purification, and i want to go back to them and live in their presence.

of course to one so modern as i am, 'enfant de mon siecle,' merely to
look at the world will be always lovely.  i tremble with pleasure when i
think that on the very day of my leaving prison both the laburnum and the
lilac will be blooming in the gardens, and that i shall see the wind stir
into restless beauty the swaying gold of the one, and make the other toss
the pale purple of its plumes, so that all the air shall be arabia for
me.  linnaeus fell on his knees and wept for joy when he saw for the
first time the long heath of some english upland made yellow with the
tawny aromatic brooms of the common furze; and i know that for me, to
whom flowers are part of desire, there are tears waiting in the petals of
some rose.  it has always been so with me from my boyhood.  there is not
a single colour hidden away in the chalice of a flower, or the curve of a
shell, to which, by some subtle sympathy with the very soul of things, my
nature does not answer.  like gautier, i have always been one of those
'pour qui le monde visible existe.'

still, i am conscious now that behind all this beauty, satisfying though
it may be, there is some spirit hidden of which the painted forms and
shapes are but modes of manifestation, and it is with this spirit that i
desire to become in harmony.  i have grown tired of the articulate
utterances of men and things.  the mystical in art, the mystical in life,
the mystical in nature this is what i am looking for.  it is absolutely
necessary for me to find it somewhere.

all trials are trials for one's life, just as all sentences are sentences
of death; and three times have i been tried.  the first time i left the
box to be arrested, the second time to be led back to the house of
detention, the third time to pass into a prison for two years.  society,
as we have constituted it, will have no place for me, has none to offer;
but nature, whose sweet rains fall on unjust and just alike, will have
clefts in the rocks where i may hide, and secret valleys in whose silence
i may weep undisturbed.  she will hang the night with stars so that i may
walk abroad in the darkness without stumbling, and send the wind over my
footprints so that none may track me to my hurt: she will cleanse me in
great waters, and with bitter herbs make me whole.


<|EndOfText|>

		scene

              _lawn in front of the terrace at hunstanton_.

[sir john _and_ lady caroline pontefract, miss worsley, _on chairs under
large yew tree_.]

lady caroline.  i believe this is the first english country house you
have stayed at, miss worsley?

hester.  yes, lady caroline.

lady caroline.  you have no country houses, i am told, in america?

hester.  we have not many.

lady caroline.  have you any country?  what we should call country?

hester.  [_smiling_.]  we have the largest country in the world, lady
caroline.  they used to tell us at school that some of our states are as
big as france and england put together.

lady caroline.  ah! you must find it very draughty, i should fancy.
[_to_ sir john.]  john, you should have your muffler.  what is the use of
my always knitting mufflers for you if you won’t wear them?

sir john.  i am quite warm, caroline, i assure you.

lady caroline.  i think not, john.  well, you couldn’t come to a more
charming place than this, miss worsley, though the house is excessively
damp, quite unpardonably damp, and dear lady hunstanton is sometimes a
little lax about the people she asks down here.  [_to_ sir john.]  jane
mixes too much.  lord illingworth, of course, is a man of high
distinction.  it is a privilege to meet him.  and that member of
parliament, mr. kettle—

sir john.  kelvil, my love, kelvil.

lady caroline.  he must be quite respectable.  one has never heard his
name before in the whole course of one’s life, which speaks volumes for a
man, nowadays.  but mrs. allonby is hardly a very suitable person.

hester.  i dislike mrs. allonby.  i dislike her more than i can say.

lady caroline.  i am not sure, miss worsley, that foreigners like
yourself should cultivate likes or dislikes about the people they are
invited to meet.  mrs. allonby is very well born.  she is a niece of lord
brancaster’s.  it is said, of course, that she ran away twice before she
was married.  but you know how unfair people often are.  i myself don’t
believe she ran away more than once.

hester.  mr. arbuthnot is very charming.

lady caroline.  ah, yes! the young man who has a post in a bank.  lady
hunstanton is most kind in asking him here, and lord illingworth seems to
have taken quite a fancy to him.  i am not sure, however, that jane is
right in taking him out of his position.  in my young days, miss worsley,
one never met any one in society who worked for their living.  it was not
considered the thing.

hester.  in america those are the people we respect most.

lady caroline.  i have no doubt of it.

hester.  mr. arbuthnot has a beautiful nature!  he is so simple, so
sincere.  he has one of the most beautiful natures i have ever come
across.  it is a privilege to meet _him_.

lady caroline.  it is not customary in england, miss worsley, for a young
lady to speak with such enthusiasm of any person of the opposite sex.
english women conceal their feelings till after they are married.  they
show them then.

hester.  do you, in england, allow no friendship to exist between a young
man and a young girl?

[_enter_ lady hunstanton, _followed by footman with shawls and a
cushion_.]

lady caroline.  we think it very inadvisable.  jane, i was just saying
what a pleasant party you have asked us to meet.  you have a wonderful
power of selection.  it is quite a gift.

lady hunstanton.  dear caroline, how kind of you!  i think we all do fit
in very nicely together.  and i hope our charming american visitor will
carry back pleasant recollections of our english country life.  [_to
footman_.]  the cushion, there, francis.  and my shawl.  the shetland.
get the shetland.  [_exit footman for shawl_.]

[_enter_ gerald arbuthnot.]

gerald.  lady hunstanton, i have such good news to tell you.  lord
illingworth has just offered to make me his secretary.

lady hunstanton.  his secretary?  that is good news indeed, gerald.  it
means a very brilliant future in store for you.  your dear mother will be
delighted.  i really must try and induce her to come up here to-night.
do you think she would, gerald?  i know how difficult it is to get her to
go anywhere.

gerald.  oh!  i am sure she would, lady hunstanton, if she knew lord
illingworth had made me such an offer.

[_enter footman with shawl_.]

lady hunstanton.  i will write and tell her about it, and ask her to come
up and meet him.  [_to footman_.]  just wait, francis.  [_writes
letter_.]

lady caroline.  that is a very wonderful opening for so young a man as
you are, mr. arbuthnot.

gerald.  it is indeed, lady caroline.  i trust i shall be able to show
myself worthy of it.

lady caroline.  i trust so.

gerald.  [_to_ hester.]  _you_ have not congratulated me yet, miss
worsley.

hester.  are you very pleased about it?

gerald.  of course i am.  it means everything to me—things that were out
of the reach of hope before may be within hope’s reach now.

hester.  nothing should be out of the reach of hope.  life is a hope.

lady hunstanton.  i fancy, caroline, that diplomacy is what lord
illingworth is aiming at.  i heard that he was offered vienna.  but that
may not be true.

lady caroline.  i don’t think that england should be represented abroad
by an unmarried man, jane.  it might lead to complications.

lady hunstanton.  you are too nervous, caroline.  believe me, you are too
nervous.  besides, lord illingworth may marry any day.  i was in hopes he
would have married lady kelso.  but i believe he said her family was too
large.  or was it her feet?  i forget which.  i regret it very much.  she
was made to be an ambassador’s wife.

lady caroline.  she certainly has a wonderful faculty of remembering
people’s names, and forgetting their faces.

lady hunstanton.  well, that is very natural, caroline, is it not?  [_to
footman_.]  tell henry to wait for an answer.  i have written a line to
your dear mother, gerald, to tell her your good news, and to say she
really must come to dinner.

[_exit footman_.]

gerald.  that is awfully kind of you, lady hunstanton.  [_to_ hester.]
will you come for a stroll, miss worsley?

hester.  with pleasure.  [_exit with_ gerald.]

lady hunstanton.  i am very much gratified at gerald arbuthnot’s good
fortune.  he is quite a _protégé_ of mine.  and i am particularly pleased
that lord illingworth should have made the offer of his own accord
without my suggesting anything.  nobody likes to be asked favours.  i
remember poor charlotte pagden making herself quite unpopular one season,
because she had a french governess she wanted to recommend to every one.

lady caroline.  i saw the governess, jane.  lady pagden sent her to me.
it was before eleanor came out.  she was far too good-looking to be in
any respectable household.  i don’t wonder lady pagden was so anxious to
get rid of her.

lady hunstanton.  ah, that explains it.

lady caroline.  john, the grass is too damp for you.  you had better go
and put on your overshoes at once.

sir john.  i am quite comfortable, caroline, i assure you.

lady caroline.  you must allow me to be the best judge of that, john.
pray do as i tell you.

[sir john _gets up and goes off_.]

lady hunstanton.  you spoil him, caroline, you do indeed!

[_enter_ mrs. allonby _and_ lady stutfield.]

[_to_ mrs. allonby.]  well, dear, i hope you like the park.  it is said
to be well timbered.

mrs. allonby.  the trees are wonderful, lady hunstanton.

lady stutfield.  quite, quite wonderful.

mrs. allonby.  but somehow, i feel sure that if i lived in the country
for six months, i should become so unsophisticated that no one would take
the slightest notice of me.

lady hunstanton.  i assure you, dear, that the country has not that
effect at all.  why, it was from melthorpe, which is only two miles from
here, that lady belton eloped with lord fethersdale.  i remember the
occurrence perfectly.  poor lord belton died three days afterwards of
joy, or gout.  i forget which.  we had a large party staying here at the
time, so we were all very much interested in the whole affair.

mrs. allonby.  i think to elope is cowardly.  it’s running away from
danger.  and danger has become so rare in modern life.

lady caroline.  as far as i can make out, the young women of the present
day seem to make it the sole object of their lives to be always playing
with fire.

mrs. allonby.  the one advantage of playing with fire, lady caroline, is
that one never gets even singed.  it is the people who don’t know how to
play with it who get burned up.

lady stutfield.  yes; i see that.  it is very, very helpful.

lady hunstanton.  i don’t know how the world would get on with such a
theory as that, dear mrs. allonby.

lady stutfield.  ah!  the world was made for men and not for women.

mrs. allonby.  oh, don’t say that, lady stutfield.  we have a much better
time than they have.  there are far more things forbidden to us than are
forbidden to them.

lady stutfield.  yes; that is quite, quite true.  i had not thought of
that.

[_enter_ sir john _and_ mr. kelvil.]

lady hunstanton.  well, mr. kelvil, have you got through your work?

kelvil.  i have finished my writing for the day, lady hunstanton.  it has
been an arduous task.  the demands on the time of a public man are very
heavy nowadays, very heavy indeed.  and i don’t think they meet with
adequate recognition.

lady caroline.  john, have you got your overshoes on?

sir john.  yes, my love.

lady caroline.  i think you had better come over here, john.  it is more
sheltered.

sir john.  i am quite comfortable, caroline.

lady caroline.  i think not, john.  you had better sit beside me.  [sir
john _rises and goes across_.]

lady stutfield.  and what have you been writing about this morning, mr.
kelvil?

kelvil.  on the usual subject, lady stutfield.  on purity.

lady stutfield.  that must be such a very, very interesting thing to
write about.

kelvil.  it is the one subject of really national importance, nowadays,
lady stutfield.  i purpose addressing my constituents on the question
before parliament meets.  i find that the poorer classes of this country
display a marked desire for a higher ethical standard.

lady stutfield.  how quite, quite nice of them.

lady caroline.  are you in favour of women taking part in politics, mr.
kettle?

sir john.  kelvil, my love, kelvil.

kelvil.  the growing influence of women is the one reassuring thing in
our political life, lady caroline.  women are always on the side of
morality, public and private.

lady stutfield.  it is so very, very gratifying to hear you say that.

lady hunstanton.  ah, yes!—the moral qualities in women—that is the
important thing.  i am afraid, caroline, that dear lord illingworth
doesn’t value the moral qualities in women as much as he should.

[_enter_ lord illingworth.]

lady stutfield.  the world says that lord illingworth is very, very
wicked.

lord illingworth.  but what world says that, lady stutfield?  it must be
the next world.  this world and i are on excellent terms.  [_sits down
beside_ mrs. allonby.]

lady stutfield.  every one _i_ know says you are very, very wicked.

lord illingworth.  it is perfectly monstrous the way people go about,
nowadays, saying things against one behind one’s back that are absolutely
and entirely true.

lady hunstanton.  dear lord illingworth is quite hopeless, lady
stutfield.  i have given up trying to reform him.  it would take a public
company with a board of directors and a paid secretary to do that.  but
you have the secretary already, lord illingworth, haven’t you?  gerald
arbuthnot has told us of his good fortune; it is really most kind of you.

lord illingworth.  oh, don’t say that, lady hunstanton.  kind is a
dreadful word.  i took a great fancy to young arbuthnot the moment i met
him, and he’ll be of considerable use to me in something i am foolish
enough to think of doing.

lady hunstanton.  he is an admirable young man.  and his mother is one of
my dearest friends.  he has just gone for a walk with our pretty
american.  she is very pretty, is she not?

lady caroline.  far too pretty.  these american girls carry off all the
good matches.  why can’t they stay in their own country?  they are always
telling us it is the paradise of women.

lord illingworth.  it is, lady caroline.  that is why, like eve, they are
so extremely anxious to get out of it.

lady caroline.  who are miss worsley’s parents?

lord illingworth.  american women are wonderfully clever in concealing
their parents.

lady hunstanton.  my dear lord illingworth, what do you mean?  miss
worsley, caroline, is an orphan.  her father was a very wealthy
millionaire or philanthropist, or both, i believe, who entertained my son
quite hospitably, when he visited boston.  i don’t know how he made his
money, originally.

kelvil.  i fancy in american dry goods.

lady hunstanton.  what are american dry goods?

lord illingworth.  american novels.

lady hunstanton.  how very singular! . . . well, from whatever source her
large fortune came, i have a great esteem for miss worsley.  she dresses
exceedingly well.  all americans do dress well.  they get their clothes
in paris.

mrs. allonby.  they say, lady hunstanton, that when good americans die
they go to paris.

lady hunstanton.  indeed?  and when bad americans die, where do they go
to?

lord illingworth.  oh, they go to america.

kelvil.  i am afraid you don’t appreciate america, lord illingworth.  it
is a very remarkable country, especially considering its youth.

lord illingworth.  the youth of america is their oldest tradition.  it
has been going on now for three hundred years.  to hear them talk one
would imagine they were in their first childhood.  as far as civilisation
goes they are in their second.

kelvil.  there is undoubtedly a great deal of corruption in american
politics.  i suppose you allude to that?

lord illingworth.  i wonder.

lady hunstanton.  politics are in a sad way everywhere, i am told.  they
certainly are in england.  dear mr. cardew is ruining the country.  i
wonder mrs. cardew allows him.  i am sure, lord illingworth, you don’t
think that uneducated people should be allowed to have votes?

lord illingworth.  i think they are the only people who should.

kelvil.  do you take no side then in modern politics, lord illingworth?

lord illingworth.  one should never take sides in anything, mr. kelvil.
taking sides is the beginning of sincerity, and earnestness follows
shortly afterwards, and the human being becomes a bore.  however, the
house of commons really does very little harm.  you can’t make people
good by act of parliament,—that is something.

kelvil.  you cannot deny that the house of commons has always shown great
sympathy with the sufferings of the poor.

lord illingworth.  that is its special vice.  that is the special vice of
the age.  one should sympathise with the joy, the beauty, the colour of
life.  the less said about life’s sores the better, mr. kelvil.

kelvil.  still our east end is a very important problem.

lord illingworth.  quite so.  it is the problem of slavery.  and we are
trying to solve it by amusing the slaves.

lady hunstanton.  certainly, a great deal may be done by means of cheap
entertainments, as you say, lord illingworth.  dear dr. daubeny, our
rector here, provides, with the assistance of his curates, really
admirable recreations for the poor during the winter.  and much good may
be done by means of a magic lantern, or a missionary, or some popular
amusement of that kind.

lady caroline.  i am not at all in favour of amusements for the poor,
jane.  blankets and coals are sufficient.  there is too much love of
pleasure amongst the upper classes as it is.  health is what we want in
modern life.  the tone is not healthy, not healthy at all.

kelvil.  you are quite right, lady caroline.

lady caroline.  i believe i am usually right.

mrs. allonby.  horrid word ‘health.’

lord illingworth.  silliest word in our language, and one knows so well
the popular idea of health.  the english country gentleman galloping
after a fox—the unspeakable in full pursuit of the uneatable.

kelvil.  may i ask, lord illingworth, if you regard the house of lords as
a better institution than the house of commons?

lord illingworth.  a much better institution, of course.  we in the house
of lords are never in touch with public opinion.  that makes us a
civilised body.

kelvil.  are you serious in putting forward such a view?

lord illingworth.  quite serious, mr. kelvil.  [_to_ mrs. allonby.]
vulgar habit that is people have nowadays of asking one, after one has
given them an idea, whether one is serious or not.  nothing is serious
except passion.  the intellect is not a serious thing, and never has
been.  it is an instrument on which one plays, that is all.  the only
serious form of intellect i know is the british intellect.  and on the
british intellect the illiterates play the drum.

lady hunstanton.  what are you saying, lord illingworth, about the drum?

lord illingworth.  i was merely talking to mrs. allonby about the leading
articles in the london newspapers.

lady hunstanton.  but do you believe all that is written in the
newspapers?

lord illingworth.  i do.  nowadays it is only the unreadable that occurs.
[_rises with_ mrs. allonby.]

lady hunstanton.  are you going, mrs. allonby?

mrs. allonby.  just as far as the conservatory.  lord illingworth told me
this morning that there was an orchid there as beautiful as the seven
deadly sins.

lady hunstanton.  my dear, i hope there is nothing of the kind.  i will
certainly speak to the gardener.

[_exit_ mrs. allonby _and_ lord illingworth.]

lady caroline.  remarkable type, mrs. allonby.

lady hunstanton.  she lets her clever tongue run away with her sometimes.

lady caroline.  is that the only thing, jane, mrs. allonby allows to run
away with her?

lady hunstanton.  i hope so, caroline, i am sure.

[_enter_ lord alfred.]

dear lord alfred, do join us.  [lord alfred _sits down beside_ lady
stutfield.]

lady caroline.  you believe good of every one, jane.  it is a great
fault.

lady stutfield.  do you really, really think, lady caroline, that one
should believe evil of every one?

lady caroline.  i think it is much safer to do so, lady stutfield.
until, of course, people are found out to be good.  but that requires a
great deal of investigation nowadays.

lady stutfield.  but there is so much unkind scandal in modern life.

lady caroline.  lord illingworth remarked to me last night at dinner that
the basis of every scandal is an absolutely immoral certainty.

kelvil.  lord illingworth is, of course, a very brilliant man, but he
seems to me to be lacking in that fine faith in the nobility and purity
of life which is so important in this century.

lady stutfield.  yes, quite, quite important, is it not?

kelvil.  he gives me the impression of a man who does not appreciate the
beauty of our english home-life.  i would say that he was tainted with
foreign ideas on the subject.

lady stutfield.  there is nothing, nothing like the beauty of home-life,
is there?

kelvil.  it is the mainstay of our moral system in england, lady
stutfield.  without it we would become like our neighbours.

lady stutfield.  that would be so, so sad, would it not?

kelvil.  i am afraid, too, that lord illingworth regards woman simply as
a toy.  now, i have never regarded woman as a toy.  woman is the
intellectual helpmeet of man in public as in private life.  without her
we should forget the true ideals.  [_sits down beside_ lady stutfield.]

lady stutfield.  i am so very, very glad to hear you say that.

lady caroline.  you a married man, mr. kettle?

sir john.  kelvil, dear, kelvil.

kelvil.  i am married, lady caroline.

lady caroline.  family?

kelvil.  yes.

lady caroline.  how many?

kelvil.  eight.

[lady stutfield _turns her attention to_ lord alfred.]

lady caroline.  mrs. kettle and the children are, i suppose, at the
seaside?  [sir john _shrugs his shoulders_.]

kelvil.  my wife is at the seaside with the children, lady caroline.

lady caroline.  you will join them later on, no doubt?

kelvil.  if my public engagements permit me.

lady caroline.  your public life must be a great source of gratification
to mrs. kettle.

sir john.  kelvil, my love, kelvil.

lady stutfield.  [_to_ lord alfred.]  how very, very charming those
gold-tipped cigarettes of yours are, lord alfred.

lord alfred.  they are awfully expensive.  i can only afford them when
i’m in debt.

lady stutfield.  it must be terribly, terribly distressing to be in debt.

lord alfred.  one must have some occupation nowadays.  if i hadn’t my
debts i shouldn’t have anything to think about.  all the chaps i know are
in debt.

lady stutfield.  but don’t the people to whom you owe the money give you
a great, great deal of annoyance?

[_enter footman_.]

lord alfred.  oh, no, they write; i don’t.

lady stutfield.  how very, very strange.

lady hunstanton.  ah, here is a letter, caroline, from dear mrs.
arbuthnot.  she won’t dine.  i am so sorry.  but she will come in the
evening.  i am very pleased indeed.  she is one of the sweetest of women.
writes a beautiful hand, too, so large, so firm.  [_hands letter to_ lady
caroline.]

lady caroline.  [_looking at it_.]  a little lacking in femininity, jane.
femininity is the quality i admire most in women.

lady hunstanton.  [_taking back letter and leaving it on table_.]  oh!
she is very feminine, caroline, and so good too.  you should hear what
the archdeacon says of her.  he regards her as his right hand in the
parish.  [_footman speaks to her_.]  in the yellow drawing-room.  shall
we all go in?  lady stutfield, shall we go in to tea?

lady stutfield.  with pleasure, lady hunstanton.  [_they rise and proceed
to go off_.  sir john offers to carry lady stutfield’s cloak.]

lady caroline.  john!  if you would allow your nephew to look after lady
stutfield’s cloak, you might help me with my workbasket.

[_enter_ lord illingworth _and_ mrs. allonby.]

sir john.  certainly, my love.  [_exeunt_.]

mrs. allonby.  curious thing, plain women are always jealous of their
husbands, beautiful women never are!

lord illingworth.  beautiful women never have time.  they are always so
occupied in being jealous of other people’s husbands.

mrs. allonby.  i should have thought lady caroline would have grown tired
of conjugal anxiety by this time!  sir john is her fourth!

lord illingworth.  so much marriage is certainly not becoming.  twenty
years of romance make a woman look like a ruin; but twenty years of
marriage make her something like a public building.

mrs. allonby.  twenty years of romance!  is there such a thing?

lord illingworth.  not in our day.  women have become too brilliant.
nothing spoils a romance so much as a sense of humour in the woman.

mrs. allonby.  or the want of it in the man.

lord illingworth.  you are quite right.  in a temple every one should be
serious, except the thing that is worshipped.

mrs. allonby.  and that should be man?

lord illingworth.  women kneel so gracefully; men don’t.

mrs. allonby.  you are thinking of lady stutfield!

lord illingworth.  i assure you i have not thought of lady stutfield for
the last quarter of an hour.

mrs. allonby.  is she such a mystery?

lord illingworth.  she is more than a mystery—she is a mood.

mrs. allonby.  moods don’t last.

lord illingworth.  it is their chief charm.

[_enter_ hester _and_ gerald.]

gerald.  lord illingworth, every one has been congratulating me, lady
hunstanton and lady caroline, and . . . every one.  i hope i shall make a
good secretary.

lord illingworth.  you will be the pattern secretary, gerald.  [_talks to
him_.]

mrs. allonby.  you enjoy country life, miss worsley?

hester.  very much indeed.

mrs. allonby.  don’t find yourself longing for a london dinner-party?

hester.  i dislike london dinner-parties.

mrs. allonby.  i adore them.  the clever people never listen, and the
stupid people never talk.

hester.  i think the stupid people talk a great deal.

mrs. allonby.  ah, i never listen!

lord illingworth.  my dear boy, if i didn’t like you i wouldn’t have made
you the offer.  it is because i like you so much that i want to have you
with me.

[_exit_ hester _with_ gerald.]

charming fellow, gerald arbuthnot!

mrs. allonby.  he is very nice; very nice indeed.  but i can’t stand the
american young lady.

lord illingworth.  why?

mrs. allonby.  she told me yesterday, and in quite a loud voice too, that
she was only eighteen.  it was most annoying.

lord illingworth.  one should never trust a woman who tells one her real
age.  a woman who would tell one that, would tell one anything.

mrs. allonby.  she is a puritan besides—

lord illingworth.  ah, that is inexcusable.  i don’t mind plain women
being puritans.  it is the only excuse they have for being plain.  but
she is decidedly pretty.  i admire her immensely.  [_looks steadfastly
at_ mrs. allonby.]

mrs. allonby.  what a thoroughly bad man you must be!

lord illingworth.  what do you call a bad man?

mrs. allonby.  the sort of man who admires innocence.

lord illingworth.  and a bad woman?

mrs. allonby.  oh! the sort of woman a man never gets tired of.

lord illingworth.  you are severe—on yourself.

mrs. allonby.  define us as a sex.

lord illingworth.  sphinxes without secrets.

mrs. allonby.  does that include the puritan women?

lord illingworth.  do you know, i don’t believe in the existence of
puritan women?  i don’t think there is a woman in the world who would not
be a little flattered if one made love to her.  it is that which makes
women so irresistibly adorable.

mrs. allonby.  you think there is no woman in the world who would object
to being kissed?

lord illingworth.  very few.

mrs. allonby.  miss worsley would not let you kiss her.

lord illingworth.  are you sure?

mrs. allonby.  quite.

lord illingworth.  what do you think she’d do if i kissed her?

mrs. allonby.  either marry you, or strike you across the face with her
glove.  what would you do if she struck you across the face with her
glove?

lord illingworth.  fall in love with her, probably.

mrs. allonby.  then it is lucky you are not going to kiss her!

lord illingworth.  is that a challenge?

mrs. allonby.  it is an arrow shot into the air.

lord illingworth.  don’t you know that i always succeed in whatever i
try?

mrs. allonby.  i am sorry to hear it.  we women adore failures.  they
lean on us.

lord illingworth.  you worship successes.  you cling to them.

mrs. allonby.  we are the laurels to hide their baldness.

lord illingworth.  and they need you always, except at the moment of
triumph.

mrs. allonby.  they are uninteresting then.

lord illingworth.  how tantalising you are!  [_a pause_.]

mrs. allonby.  lord illingworth, there is one thing i shall always like
you for.

lord illingworth.  only one thing?  and i have so many bad qualities.

mrs. allonby.  ah, don’t be too conceited about them.  you may lose them
as you grow old.

lord illingworth.  i never intend to grow old.  the soul is born old but
grows young.  that is the comedy of life.

mrs. allonby.  and the body is born young and grows old.  that is life’s
tragedy.

lord illingworth.  its comedy also, sometimes.  but what is the
mysterious reason why you will always like me?

mrs. allonby.  it is that you have never made love to me.

lord illingworth.  i have never done anything else.

mrs. allonby.  really?  i have not noticed it.

lord illingworth.  how fortunate!  it might have been a tragedy for both
of us.

mrs. allonby.  we should each have survived.

lord illingworth.  one can survive everything nowadays, except death, and
live down anything except a good reputation.

mrs. allonby.  have you tried a good reputation?

lord illingworth.  it is one of the many annoyances to which i have never
been subjected.

mrs. allonby.  it may come.

lord illingworth.  why do you threaten me?

mrs. allonby.  i will tell you when you have kissed the puritan.

[_enter footman_.]

francis.  tea is served in the yellow drawing-room, my lord.

lord illingworth.  tell her ladyship we are coming in.

francis.  yes, my lord.

[_exit_.]

lord illingworth.  shall we go in to tea?

mrs. allonby.  do you like such simple pleasures?

lord illingworth.  i adore simple pleasures.  they are the last refuge of
the complex.  but, if you wish, let us stay here.  yes, let us stay here.
the book of life begins with a man and a woman in a garden.

mrs. allonby.  it ends with revelations.

lord illingworth.  you fence divinely.  but the button has come of your
foil.

mrs. allonby.  i have still the mask.

lord illingworth.  it makes your eyes lovelier.

mrs. allonby.  thank you.  come.

lord illingworth.  [_sees_ mrs. arbuthnot’s _letter on table_, _and takes
it up and looks at envelope_.]  what a curious handwriting!  it reminds
me of the handwriting of a woman i used to know years ago.

mrs. allonby.  who?

lord illingworth.  oh! no one.  no one in particular.  a woman of no
importance.  [_throws letter down_, _and passes up the steps of the
terrace with_ mrs. allonby.  _they smile at each other_.]

                                act drop.




second act


                                  scene

 _drawing-room at hunstanton_, _after dinner_, _lamps lit_.  _door_ l.c.
                               _door_ r.c.

[_ladies seated on sofas_.]

mrs. allonby.  what a comfort it is to have got rid of the men for a
little!

lady stutfield.  yes; men persecute us dreadfully, don’t they?

mrs. allonby.  persecute us?  i wish they did.

lady hunstanton.  my dear!

mrs. allonby.  the annoying thing is that the wretches can be perfectly
happy without us.  that is why i think it is every woman’s duty never to
leave them alone for a single moment, except during this short breathing
space after dinner; without which i believe we poor women would be
absolutely worn to shadows.

[_enter servants with coffee_.]

lady hunstanton.  worn to shadows, dear?

mrs. allonby.  yes, lady hunstanton.  it is such a strain keeping men up
to the mark.  they are always trying to escape from us.

lady stutfield.  it seems to me that it is we who are always trying to
escape from them.  men are so very, very heartless.  they know their
power and use it.

lady caroline.  [_takes coffee from servant_.]  what stuff and nonsense
all this about men is!  the thing to do is to keep men in their proper
place.

mrs. allonby.  but what is their proper place, lady caroline?

lady caroline.  looking after their wives, mrs. allonby.

mrs. allonby.  [_takes coffee from servant_.]  really?  and if they’re
not married?

lady caroline.  if they are not married, they should be looking after a
wife.  it’s perfectly scandalous the amount of bachelors who are going
about society.  there should be a law passed to compel them all to marry
within twelve months.

lady stutfield.  [_refuses coffee_.]  but if they’re in love with some
one who, perhaps, is tied to another?

lady caroline.  in that case, lady stutfield, they should be married off
in a week to some plain respectable girl, in order to teach them not to
meddle with other people’s property.

mrs. allonby.  i don’t think that we should ever be spoken of as other
people’s property.  all men are married women’s property.  that is the
only true definition of what married women’s property really is.  but we
don’t belong to any one.

lady stutfield.  oh, i am so very, very glad to hear you say so.

lady hunstanton.  but do you really think, dear caroline, that
legislation would improve matters in any way?  i am told that, nowadays,
all the married men live like bachelors, and all the bachelors like
married men.

mrs. allonby.  i certainly never know one from the other.

lady stutfield.  oh, i think one can always know at once whether a man
has home claims upon his life or not.  i have noticed a very, very sad
expression in the eyes of so many married men.

mrs. allonby.  ah, all that i have noticed is that they are horribly
tedious when they are good husbands, and abominably conceited when they
are not.

lady hunstanton.  well, i suppose the type of husband has completely
changed since my young days, but i’m bound to state that poor dear
hunstanton was the most delightful of creatures, and as good as gold.

mrs. allonby.  ah, my husband is a sort of promissory note; i’m tired of
meeting him.

lady caroline.  but you renew him from time to time, don’t you?

mrs. allonby.  oh no, lady caroline.  i have only had one husband as yet.
i suppose you look upon me as quite an amateur.

lady caroline.  with your views on life i wonder you married at all.

mrs. allonby.  so do i.

lady hunstanton.  my dear child, i believe you are really very happy in
your married life, but that you like to hide your happiness from others.

mrs. allonby.  i assure you i was horribly deceived in ernest.

lady hunstanton.  oh, i hope not, dear.  i knew his mother quite well.
she was a stratton, caroline, one of lord crowland’s daughters.

lady caroline.  victoria stratton?  i remember her perfectly.  a silly
fair-haired woman with no chin.

mrs. allonby.  ah, ernest has a chin.  he has a very strong chin, a
square chin.  ernest’s chin is far too square.

lady stutfield.  but do you really think a man’s chin can be too square?
i think a man should look very, very strong, and that his chin should be
quite, quite square.

mrs. allonby.  then you should certainly know ernest, lady stutfield.  it
is only fair to tell you beforehand he has got no conversation at all.

lady stutfield.  i adore silent men.

mrs. allonby.  oh, ernest isn’t silent.  he talks the whole time.  but he
has got no conversation.  what he talks about i don’t know.  i haven’t
listened to him for years.

lady stutfield.  have you never forgiven him then?  how sad that seems!
but all life is very, very sad, is it not?

mrs. allonby.  life, lady stutfield, is simply a _mauvais quart d’heure_
made up of exquisite moments.

lady stutfield.  yes, there are moments, certainly.  but was it something
very, very wrong that mr. allonby did?  did he become angry with you, and
say anything that was unkind or true?

mrs. allonby.  oh dear, no.  ernest is invariably calm.  that is one of
the reasons he always gets on my nerves.  nothing is so aggravating as
calmness.  there is something positively brutal about the good temper of
most modern men.  i wonder we women stand it as well as we do.

lady stutfield.  yes; men’s good temper shows they are not so sensitive
as we are, not so finely strung.  it makes a great barrier often between
husband and wife, does it not?  but i would so much like to know what was
the wrong thing mr. allonby did.

mrs. allonby.  well, i will tell you, if you solemnly promise to tell
everybody else.

lady stutfield.  thank you, thank you.  i will make a point of repeating
it.

mrs. allonby.  when ernest and i were engaged, he swore to me positively
on his knees that he had never loved any one before in the whole course
of his life.  i was very young at the time, so i didn’t believe him, i
needn’t tell you.  unfortunately, however, i made no enquiries of any
kind till after i had been actually married four or five months.  i found
out then that what he had told me was perfectly true.  and that sort of
thing makes a man so absolutely uninteresting.

lady hunstanton.  my dear!

mrs. allonby.  men always want to be a woman’s first love.  that is their
clumsy vanity.  we women have a more subtle instinct about things.  what
we like is to be a man’s last romance.

lady stutfield.  i see what you mean.  it’s very, very beautiful.

lady hunstanton.  my dear child, you don’t mean to tell me that you won’t
forgive your husband because he never loved any one else?  did you ever
hear such a thing, caroline?  i am quite surprised.

lady caroline.  oh, women have become so highly educated, jane, that
nothing should surprise us nowadays, except happy marriages.  they
apparently are getting remarkably rare.

mrs. allonby.  oh, they’re quite out of date.

lady stutfield.  except amongst the middle classes, i have been told.

mrs. allonby.  how like the middle classes!

lady stutfield.  yes—is it not?—very, very like them.

lady caroline.  if what you tell us about the middle classes is true,
lady stutfield, it redounds greatly to their credit.  it is much to be
regretted that in our rank of life the wife should be so persistently
frivolous, under the impression apparently that it is the proper thing to
be.  it is to that i attribute the unhappiness of so many marriages we
all know of in society.

mrs. allonby.  do you know, lady caroline, i don’t think the frivolity of
the wife has ever anything to do with it. more marriages are ruined
nowadays by the common sense of the husband than by anything else.  how
can a woman be expected to be happy with a man who insists on treating
her as if she were a perfectly rational being?

lady hunstanton.  my dear!

mrs. allonby.  man, poor, awkward, reliable, necessary man belongs to a
sex that has been rational for millions and millions of years.  he can’t
help himself.  it is in his race.  the history of woman is very
different.  we have always been picturesque protests against the mere
existence of common sense.  we saw its dangers from the first.

lady stutfield.  yes, the common sense of husbands is certainly most,
most trying.  do tell me your conception of the ideal husband.  i think
it would be so very, very helpful.

mrs. allonby.  the ideal husband?  there couldn’t be such a thing.  the
institution is wrong.

lady stutfield.  the ideal man, then, in his relations to _us_.

lady caroline.  he would probably be extremely realistic.

mrs. caroline.  the ideal man!  oh, the ideal man should talk to us as if
we were goddesses, and treat us as if we were children.  he should refuse
all our serious requests, and gratify every one of our whims.  he should
encourage us to have caprices, and forbid us to have missions.  he should
always say much more than he means, and always mean much more than he
says.

lady hunstanton.  but how could he do both, dear?

mrs. allonby.  he should never run down other pretty women.  that would
show he had no taste, or make one suspect that he had too much.  no; he
should be nice about them all, but say that somehow they don’t attract
him.

lady stutfield.  yes, that is always very, very pleasant to hear about
other women.

mrs. allonby.  if we ask him a question about anything, he should give us
an answer all about ourselves.  he should invariably praise us for
whatever qualities he knows we haven’t got.  but he should be pitiless,
quite pitiless, in reproaching us for the virtues that we have never
dreamed of possessing.  he should never believe that we know the use of
useful things.  that would be unforgiveable.  but he should shower on us
everything we don’t want.

lady caroline.  as far as i can see, he is to do nothing but pay bills
and compliments.

mrs. allonby.  he should persistently compromise us in public, and treat
us with absolute respect when we are alone.  and yet he should be always
ready to have a perfectly terrible scene, whenever we want one, and to
become miserable, absolutely miserable, at a moment’s notice, and to
overwhelm us with just reproaches in less than twenty minutes, and to be
positively violent at the end of half an hour, and to leave us for ever
at a quarter to eight, when we have to go and dress for dinner.  and
when, after that, one has seen him for really the last time, and he has
refused to take back the little things he has given one, and promised
never to communicate with one again, or to write one any foolish letters,
he should be perfectly broken-hearted, and telegraph to one all day long,
and send one little notes every half-hour by a private hansom, and dine
quite alone at the club, so that every one should know how unhappy he
was.  and after a whole dreadful week, during which one has gone about
everywhere with one’s husband, just to show how absolutely lonely one
was, he may be given a third last parting, in the evening, and then, if
his conduct has been quite irreproachable, and one has behaved really
badly to him, he should be allowed to admit that he has been entirely in
the wrong, and when he has admitted that, it becomes a woman’s duty to
forgive, and one can do it all over again from the beginning, with
variations.

lady hunstanton.  how clever you are, my dear!  you never mean a single
word you say.

lady stutfield.  thank you, thank you.  it has been quite, quite
entrancing.  i must try and remember it all.  there are such a number of
details that are so very, very important.

lady caroline.  but you have not told us yet what the reward of the ideal
man is to be.

mrs. allonby.  his reward?  oh, infinite expectation.  that is quite
enough for him.

lady stutfield.  but men are so terribly, terribly exacting, are they
not?

mrs. allonby.  that makes no matter.  one should never surrender.

lady stutfield.  not even to the ideal man?

mrs. allonby.  certainly not to him.  unless, of course, one wants to
grow tired of him.

lady stutfield.  oh! . . . yes.  i see that.  it is very, very helpful.
do you think, mrs. allonby, i shall ever meet the ideal man?  or are
there more than one?

mrs. allonby.  there are just four in london, lady stutfield.

lady hunstanton.  oh, my dear!

mrs. allonby.  [_going over to her_.]  what has happened?  do tell me.

lady hunstanton [_in a low voice_]  i had completely forgotten that the
american young lady has been in the room all the time.  i am afraid some
of this clever talk may have shocked her a little.

mrs. allonby.  ah, that will do her so much good!

lady hunstanton.  let us hope she didn’t understand much.  i think i had
better go over and talk to her.  [_rises and goes across to_ hester
worsley.]  well, dear miss worsley. [_sitting down beside her_.]  how
quiet you have been in your nice little corner all this time!  i suppose
you have been reading a book?  there are so many books here in the
library.

hester.  no, i have been listening to the conversation.

lady hunstanton.  you mustn’t believe everything that was said, you know,
dear.

hester.  i didn’t believe any of it

lady hunstanton.  that is quite right, dear.

hester.  [_continuing_.]  i couldn’t believe that any women could really
hold such views of life as i have heard to-night from some of your
guests.  [_an awkward pause_.]

lady hunstanton.  i hear you have such pleasant society in america.
quite like our own in places, my son wrote to me.

hester.  there are cliques in america as elsewhere, lady hunstanton.  but
true american society consists simply of all the good women and good men
we have in our country.

lady hunstanton.  what a sensible system, and i dare say quite pleasant
too.  i am afraid in england we have too many artificial social barriers.
we don’t see as much as we should of the middle and lower classes.

hester.  in america we have no lower classes.

lady hunstanton.  really?  what a very strange arrangement!

mrs. allonby.  what is that dreadful girl talking about?

lady stutfield.  she is painfully natural, is she not?

lady caroline.  there are a great many things you haven’t got in america,
i am told, miss worsley.  they say you have no ruins, and no curiosities.

mrs. allonby.  [_to_ lady stutfield.]  what nonsense!  they have their
mothers and their manners.

hester.  the english aristocracy supply us with our curiosities, lady
caroline.  they are sent over to us every summer, regularly, in the
steamers, and propose to us the day after they land.  as for ruins, we
are trying to build up something that will last longer than brick or
stone.  [_gets up to take her fan from table_.]

lady hunstanton.  what is that, dear?  ah, yes, an iron exhibition, is it
not, at that place that has the curious name?

hester.  [_standing by table_.]  we are trying to build up life, lady
hunstanton, on a better, truer, purer basis than life rests on here.
this sounds strange to you all, no doubt.  how could it sound other than
strange?  you rich people in england, you don’t know how you are living.
how could you know?  you shut out from your society the gentle and the
good.  you laugh at the simple and the pure.  living, as you all do, on
others and by them, you sneer at self-sacrifice, and if you throw bread
to the poor, it is merely to keep them quiet for a season.  with all your
pomp and wealth and art you don’t know how to live—you don’t even know
that.  you love the beauty that you can see and touch and handle, the
beauty that you can destroy, and do destroy, but of the unseen beauty of
life, of the unseen beauty of a higher life, you know nothing.  you have
lost life’s secret.  oh, your english society seems to me shallow,
selfish, foolish.  it has blinded its eyes, and stopped its ears.  it
lies like a leper in purple.  it sits like a dead thing smeared with
gold.  it is all wrong, all wrong.

lady stutfield.  i don’t think one should know of these things.  it is
not very, very nice, is it?

lady hunstanton.  my dear miss worsley, i thought you liked english
society so much.  you were such a success in it.  and you were so much
admired by the best people.  i quite forget what lord henry weston said
of you—but it was most complimentary, and you know what an authority he
is on beauty.

hester.  lord henry weston!  i remember him, lady hunstanton.  a man with
a hideous smile and a hideous past.  he is asked everywhere.  no
dinner-party is complete without him.  what of those whose ruin is due to
him?  they are outcasts.  they are nameless.  if you met them in the
street you would turn your head away.  i don’t complain of their
punishment.  let all women who have sinned be punished.

[mrs. arbuthnot _enters from terrace behind in a cloak with a lace veil
over her head_.  _she hears the last words and starts_.]

lady hunstanton.  my dear young lady!

hester.  it is right that they should be punished, but don’t let them be
the only ones to suffer.  if a man and woman have sinned, let them both
go forth into the desert to love or loathe each other there.  let them
both be branded.  set a mark, if you wish, on each, but don’t punish the
one and let the other go free.  don’t have one law for men and another
for women.  you are unjust to women in england.  and till you count what
is a shame in a woman to be an infamy in a man, you will always be
unjust, and right, that pillar of fire, and wrong, that pillar of cloud,
will be made dim to your eyes, or be not seen at all, or if seen, not
regarded.

lady caroline.  might i, dear miss worsley, as you are standing up, ask
you for my cotton that is just behind you?  thank you.

lady hunstanton.  my dear mrs. arbuthnot!  i am so pleased you have come
up.  but i didn’t hear you announced.

mrs. allonby.  oh, i came straight in from the terrace, lady hunstanton,
just as i was.  you didn’t tell me you had a party.

lady hunstanton.  not a party.  only a few guests who are staying in the
house, and whom you must know.  allow me.  [_tries to help her_.  _rings
bell_.]  caroline, this is mrs. arbuthnot, one of my sweetest friends.
lady caroline pontefract, lady stutfield, mrs. allonby, and my young
american friend, miss worsley, who has just been telling us all how
wicked we are.

hester.  i am afraid you think i spoke too strongly, lady hunstanton.
but there are some things in england—

lady hunstanton.  my dear young lady, there was a great deal of truth, i
dare say, in what you said, and you looked very pretty while you said it,
which is much more important, lord illingworth would tell us.  the only
point where i thought you were a little hard was about lady caroline’s
brother, about poor lord henry.  he is really such good company.

[_enter footman_.]

take mrs. arbuthnot’s things.

[_exit footman with wraps_.]

hester.  lady caroline, i had no idea it was your brother.  i am sorry
for the pain i must have caused you—i—

lady caroline.  my dear miss worsley, the only part of your little
speech, if i may so term it, with which i thoroughly agreed, was the part
about my brother.  nothing that you could possibly say could be too bad
for him.  i regard henry as infamous, absolutely infamous.  but i am
bound to state, as you were remarking, jane, that he is excellent
company, and he has one of the best cooks in london, and after a good
dinner one can forgive anybody, even one’s own relations.

lady hunstanton [_to_ miss worsley]  now, do come, dear, and make friends
with mrs. arbuthnot.  she is one of the good, sweet, simple people you
told us we never admitted into society.  i am sorry to say mrs. arbuthnot
comes very rarely to me.  but that is not my fault.

mrs. allonby.  what a bore it is the men staying so long after dinner!  i
expect they are saying the most dreadful things about us.

lady stutfield.  do you really think so?

mrs. allonby.  i was sure of it.

lady stutfield.  how very, very horrid of them!  shall we go onto the
terrace?

mrs. allonby.  oh, anything to get away from the dowagers and the
dowdies.  [_rises and goes with_ lady stutfield _to door_ l.c.]  we are
only going to look at the stars, lady hunstanton.

lady hunstanton.  you will find a great many, dear, a great many.  but
don’t catch cold.  [_to_ mrs. arbuthnot.]  we shall all miss gerald so
much, dear mrs. arbuthnot.

mrs. arbuthnot.  but has lord illingworth really offered to make gerald
his secretary?

lady hunstanton.  oh, yes!  he has been most charming about it.  he has
the highest possible opinion of your boy.  you don’t know lord
illingworth, i believe, dear.

mrs. arbuthnot.  i have never met him.

lady hunstanton.  you know him by name, no doubt?

mrs. arbuthnot.  i am afraid i don’t.  i live so much out of the world,
and see so few people.  i remember hearing years ago of an old lord
illingworth who lived in yorkshire, i think.

lady hunstanton.  ah, yes.  that would be the last earl but one.  he was
a very curious man.  he wanted to marry beneath him.  or wouldn’t, i
believe.  there was some scandal about it.  the present lord illingworth
is quite different.  he is very distinguished.  he does—well, he does
nothing, which i am afraid our pretty american visitor here thinks very
wrong of anybody, and i don’t know that he cares much for the subjects in
which you are so interested, dear mrs. arbuthnot.  do you think,
caroline, that lord illingworth is interested in the housing of the poor?

lady caroline.  i should fancy not at all, jane.

lady hunstanton.  we all have our different tastes, have we not?  but
lord illingworth has a very high position, and there is nothing he
couldn’t get if he chose to ask for it.  of course, he is comparatively a
young man still, and he has only come to his title within—how long
exactly is it, caroline, since lord illingworth succeeded?

lady caroline.  about four years, i think, jane.  i know it was the same
year in which my brother had his last exposure in the evening newspapers.

lady hunstanton.  ah, i remember.  that would be about four years ago.
of course, there were a great many people between the present lord
illingworth and the title, mrs. arbuthnot.  there was—who was there,
caroline?

lady caroline.  there was poor margaret’s baby.  you remember how anxious
she was to have a boy, and it was a boy, but it died, and her husband
died shortly afterwards, and she married almost immediately one of lord
ascot’s sons, who, i am told, beats her.

lady hunstanton.  ah, that is in the family, dear, that is in the family.
and there was also, i remember, a clergyman who wanted to be a lunatic,
or a lunatic who wanted to be a clergyman, i forget which, but i know the
court of chancery investigated the matter, and decided that he was quite
sane.  and i saw him afterwards at poor lord plumstead’s with straws in
his hair, or something very odd about him.  i can’t recall what.  i often
regret, lady caroline, that dear lady cecilia never lived to see her son
get the title.

mrs. arbuthnot.  lady cecilia?

lady hunstanton.  lord illingworth’s mother, dear mrs. arbuthnot, was one
of the duchess of jerningham’s pretty daughters, and she married sir
thomas harford, who wasn’t considered a very good match for her at the
time, though he was said to be the handsomest man in london.  i knew them
all quite intimately, and both the sons, arthur and george.

mrs. arbuthnot.  it was the eldest son who succeeded, of course, lady
hunstanton?

lady hunstanton.  no, dear, he was killed in the hunting field.  or was
it fishing, caroline?  i forget.  but george came in for everything.  i
always tell him that no younger son has ever had such good luck as he has
had.

mrs. arbuthnot.  lady hunstanton, i want to speak to gerald at once.
might i see him?  can he be sent for?

lady hunstanton.  certainly, dear.  i will send one of the servants into
the dining-room to fetch him.  i don’t know what keeps the gentlemen so
long.  [_rings bell_.]  when i knew lord illingworth first as plain
george harford, he was simply a very brilliant young man about town, with
not a penny of money except what poor dear lady cecilia gave him.  she
was quite devoted to him.  chiefly, i fancy, because he was on bad terms
with his father.  oh, here is the dear archdeacon.  [_to servant_.]  it
doesn’t matter.

[_enter_ sir john _and_ doctor daubeny.  sir john _goes over to_ lady
stutfield, doctor daubeny _to_ lady hunstanton.]

the archdeacon.  lord illingworth has been most entertaining.  i have
never enjoyed myself more.  [_sees_ mrs. arbuthnot.]  ah, mrs. arbuthnot.

lady hunstanton.  [_to_ doctor baubeny.]  you see i have got mrs.
arbuthnot to come to me at last.

the archdeacon.  that is a great honour, lady hunstanton.  mrs. daubeny
will be quite jealous of you.

lady hunstanton.  ah, i am so sorry mrs. daubeny could not come with you
to-night.  headache as usual, i suppose.

the archdeacon.  yes, lady hunstanton; a perfect martyr.  but she is
happiest alone.  she is happiest alone.

lady caroline.  [_to her husband_.]  john!  [sir john _goes over to his
wife_.  doctor baubeny _talks to_ lady hunstanton _and_ mrs. arbuthnot.]

[mrs. arbuthnot watches lord illingworth the whole time.  he has passed
across the room without noticing her, and approaches mrs. allonby, who
with lady stutfield is standing by the door looking on to the terrace.]

lord illingworth.  how is the most charming woman in the world?

mrs. allonby.  [taking lady stutfield by the hand.]  we are both quite
well, thank you, lord illingworth.  but what a short time you have been
in the dining-room!  it seems as if we had only just left.

lord illingworth.  i was bored to death.  never opened my lips the whole
time.  absolutely longing to come in to you.

mrs. allonby.  you should have.  the american girl has been giving us a
lecture.

lord illingworth.  really?  all americans lecture, i believe.  i suppose
it is something in their climate.  what did she lecture about?

mrs. allonby.  oh, puritanism, of course.

lord illingworth.  i am going to convert her, am i not?  how long do you
give me?

mrs. allonby.  a week.

lord illingworth.  a week is more than enough.

[_enter_ gerald _and_ lord alfred.]

gerald.  [_going to_ mrs. arbuthnot.]  dear mother!

mrs. arbuthnot.  gerald, i don’t feel at all well.  see me home, gerald.
i shouldn’t have come.

gerald.  i am so sorry, mother.  certainly.  but you must know lord
illingworth first.  [_goes across room_.]

mrs. arbuthnot.  not to-night, gerald.

gerald.  lord illingworth, i want you so much to know my mother.

lord illingworth.  with the greatest pleasure.  [_to_ mrs. allonby.]
i’ll be back in a moment.  people’s mothers always bore me to death.  all
women become like their mothers.  that is their tragedy.

mrs. allonby.  no man does.  that is his.

lord illingworth.  what a delightful mood you are in to-night!  [_turns
round and goes across with_ gerald _to_ mrs. arbuthnot.  _when he sees
her_, _he starts back in wonder_.  _then slowly his eyes turn towards_
gerald.]

gerald.  mother, this is lord illingworth, who has offered to take me as
his private secretary.  [mrs. arbuthnot _bows coldly_.]  it is a
wonderful opening for me, isn’t it?  i hope he won’t be disappointed in
me, that is all.  you’ll thank lord illingworth, mother, won’t you?

mrs. arbuthnot.  lord illingworth in very good, i am sure, to interest
himself in you for the moment.

lord illingworth.  [_putting his hand on_ gerald’s _shoulder_.]  oh,
gerald and i are great friends already, mrs . . . arbuthnot.

mrs. arbuthnot.  there can be nothing in common between you and my son,
lord illingworth.

gerald.  dear mother, how can you say so?  of course lord illingworth is
awfully clever and that sort of thing.  there is nothing lord illingworth
doesn’t know.

lord illingworth.  my dear boy!

gerald.  he knows more about life than any one i have ever met.  i feel
an awful duffer when i am with you, lord illingworth.  of course, i have
had so few advantages.  i have not been to eton or oxford like other
chaps.  but lord illingworth doesn’t seem to mind that.  he has been
awfully good to me, mother.

mrs. arbuthnot.  lord illingworth may change his mind.  he may not really
want you as his secretary.

gerald.  mother!

mrs. arbuthnot.  you must remember, as you said yourself, you have had so
few advantages.

mrs. allonby.  lord illingworth, i want to speak to you for a moment.  do
come over.

lord illingworth.  will you excuse me, mrs. arbuthnot?  now, don’t let
your charming mother make any more difficulties, gerald.  the thing is
quite settled, isn’t it?

gerald.  i hope so.  [lord illingworth _goes across to_ mrs. arbuthnot.]

mrs. allonby.  i thought you were never going to leave the lady in black
velvet.

lord illingworth.  she is excessively handsome.  [_looks at_ mrs.
arbuthnot.]

lady hunstanton.  caroline, shall we all make a move to the music-room?
miss worsley is going to play.  you’ll come too, dear mrs. arbuthnot,
won’t you?  you don’t know what a treat is in store for you.  [_to_
doctor baubeny.]  i must really take miss worsley down some afternoon to
the rectory.  i should so much like dear mrs. daubeny to hear her on the
violin.  ah, i forgot.  dear mrs. daubeny’s hearing is a little
defective, is it not?

the archdeacon.  her deafness is a great privation to her.  she can’t
even hear my sermons now.  she reads them at home.  but she has many
resources in herself, many resources.

lady hunstanton.  she reads a good deal, i suppose?

the archdeacon.  just the very largest print.  the eyesight is rapidly
going.  but she’s never morbid, never morbid.

gerald.  [_to_ lord illingworth.]  do speak to my mother, lord
illingworth, before you go into the music-room.  she seems to think,
somehow, you don’t mean what you said to me.

mrs. allonby.  aren’t you coming?

lord illingworth.  in a few moments.  lady hunstanton, if mrs. arbuthnot
would allow me, i would like to say a few words to her, and we will join
you later on.

lady hunstanton.  ah, of course.  you will have a great deal to say to
her, and she will have a great deal to thank you for.  it is not every
son who gets such an offer, mrs. arbuthnot.  but i know you appreciate
that, dear.

lady caroline.  john!

lady hunstanton.  now, don’t keep mrs. arbuthnot too long, lord
illingworth.  we can’t spare her.

[_exit following the other guests_.  _sound of violin heard from
music-room_.]

lord illingworth.  so that is our son, rachel!  well, i am very proud of
him.  he in a harford, every inch of him.  by the way, why arbuthnot,
rachel?

mrs. arbuthnot.  one name is as good as another, when one has no right to
any name.

lord illingworth.  i suppose so—but why gerald?

mrs. arbuthnot.  after a man whose heart i broke—after my father.

lord illingworth.  well, rachel, what in over is over.  all i have got to
say now in that i am very, very much pleased with our boy.  the world
will know him merely as my private secretary, but to me he will be
something very near, and very dear.  it is a curious thing, rachel; my
life seemed to be quite complete.  it was not so.  it lacked something,
it lacked a son.  i have found my son now, i am glad i have found him.

mrs. arbuthnot.  you have no right to claim him, or the smallest part of
him.  the boy is entirely mine, and shall remain mine.

lord illingworth.  my dear rachel, you have had him to yourself for over
twenty years.  why not let me have him for a little now?  he is quite as
much mine as yours.

mrs. arbuthnot.  are you talking of the child you abandoned?  of the
child who, as far as you are concerned, might have died of hunger and of
want?

lord illingworth.  you forget, rachel, it was you who left me.  it was
not i who left you.

mrs. arbuthnot.  i left you because you refused to give the child a name.
before my son was born, i implored you to marry me.

lord illingworth.  i had no expectations then.  and besides, rachel, i
wasn’t much older than you were.  i was only twenty-two.  i was
twenty-one, i believe, when the whole thing began in your father’s
garden.

mrs. arbuthnot.  when a man is old enough to do wrong he should be old
enough to do right also.

lord illingworth.  my dear rachel, intellectual generalities are always
interesting, but generalities in morals mean absolutely nothing.  as for
saying i left our child to starve, that, of course, is untrue and silly.
my mother offered you six hundred a year.  but you wouldn’t take
anything.  you simply disappeared, and carried the child away with you.

mrs. arbuthnot.  i wouldn’t have accepted a penny from her.  your father
was different.  he told you, in my presence, when we were in paris, that
it was your duty to marry me.

lord illingworth.  oh, duty is what one expects from others, it is not
what one does oneself.  of course, i was influenced by my mother.  every
man is when he is young.

mrs. arbuthnot.  i am glad to hear you say so.  gerald shall certainly
not go away with you.

lord illingworth.  what nonsense, rachel!

mrs. arbuthnot.  do you think i would allow my son—

lord illingworth.  _our_ son.

mrs. arbuthnot.  my son [lord illingworth _shrugs his shoulders_]—to go
away with the man who spoiled my youth, who ruined my life, who has
tainted every moment of my days?  you don’t realise what my past has been
in suffering and in shame.

lord illingworth.  my dear rachel, i must candidly say that i think
gerald’s future considerably more important than your past.

mrs. arbuthnot.  gerald cannot separate his future from my past.

lord illingworth.  that is exactly what he should do.  that is exactly
what you should help him to do.  what a typical woman you are!  you talk
sentimentally, and you are thoroughly selfish the whole time.  but don’t
let us have a scene.  rachel, i want you to look at this matter from the
common-sense point of view, from the point of view of what is best for
our son, leaving you and me out of the question.  what is our son at
present?  an underpaid clerk in a small provincial bank in a third-rate
english town.  if you imagine he is quite happy in such a position, you
are mistaken.  he is thoroughly discontented.

mrs. arbuthnot.  he was not discontented till he met you.  you have made
him so.

lord illingworth.  of course, i made him so.  discontent is the first
step in the progress of a man or a nation.  but i did not leave him with
a mere longing for things he could not get.  no, i made him a charming
offer.  he jumped at it, i need hardly say.  any young man would.  and
now, simply because it turns out that i am the boy’s own father and he my
own son, you propose practically to ruin his career.  that is to say, if
i were a perfect stranger, you would allow gerald to go away with me, but
as he is my own flesh and blood you won’t.  how utterly illogical you
are!

mrs. arbuthnot.  i will not allow him to go.

lord illingworth.  how can you prevent it?  what excuse can you give to
him for making him decline such an offer as mine?  i won’t tell him in
what relations i stand to him, i need hardly say.  but you daren’t tell
him.  you know that.  look how you have brought him up.

mrs. arbuthnot.  i have brought him up to be a good man.

lord illingworth.  quite so.  and what is the result?  you have educated
him to be your judge if he ever finds you out.  and a bitter, an unjust
judge he will be to you.  don’t be deceived, rachel.  children begin by
loving their parents.  after a time they judge them.  rarely, if ever, do
they forgive them.

mrs. arbuthnot.  george, don’t take my son away from me.  i have had
twenty years of sorrow, and i have only had one thing to love me, only
one thing to love.  you have had a life of joy, and pleasure, and
success.  you have been quite happy, you have never thought of us.  there
was no reason, according to your views of life, why you should have
remembered us at all.  your meeting us was a mere accident, a horrible
accident.  forget it.  don’t come now, and rob me of . . . of all i have
in the whole world.  you are so rich in other things.  leave me the
little vineyard of my life; leave me the walled-in garden and the well of
water; the ewe-lamb god sent me, in pity or in wrath, oh! leave me that.
george, don’t take gerald from me.

lord illingworth.  rachel, at the present moment you are not necessary to
gerald’s career; i am.  there is nothing more to be said on the subject.

mrs. arbuthnot.  i will not let him go.

lord illingworth.  here is gerald.  he has a right to decide for himself.

[_enter_ gerald.]

gerald.  well, dear mother, i hope you have settled it all with lord
illingworth?

mrs. arbuthnot.  i have not, gerald.

lord illingworth.  your mother seems not to like your coming with me, for
some reason.

gerald.  why, mother?

mrs. arbuthnot.  i thought you were quite happy here with me, gerald.  i
didn’t know you were so anxious to leave me.

gerald.  mother, how can you talk like that?  of course i have been quite
happy with you.  but a man can’t stay always with his mother.  no chap
does.  i want to make myself a position, to do something.  i thought you
would have been proud to see me lord illingworth’s secretary.

mrs. arbuthnot.  i do not think you would be suitable as a private
secretary to lord illingworth.  you have no qualifications.

lord illingworth.  i don’t wish to seem to interfere for a moment, mrs.
arbuthnot, but as far as your last objection is concerned, i surely am
the best judge.  and i can only tell you that your son has all the
qualifications i had hoped for.  he has more, in fact, than i had even
thought of.  far more.  [mrs. arbuthnot _remains silent_.]  have you any
other reason, mrs. arbuthnot, why you don’t wish your son to accept this
post?

gerald.  have you, mother?  do answer.

lord illingworth.  if you have, mrs. arbuthnot, pray, pray say it.  we
are quite by ourselves here.  whatever it is, i need not say i will not
repeat it.

gerald.  mother?

lord illingworth.  if you would like to be alone with your son, i will
leave you.  you may have some other reason you don’t wish me to hear.

mrs. arbuthnot.  i have no other reason.

lord illingworth.  then, my dear boy, we may look on the thing as
settled.  come, you and i will smoke a cigarette on the terrace together.
and mrs. arbuthnot, pray let me tell you, that i think you have acted
very, very wisely.

[_exit with_ gerald.  mrs. arbuthnot _is left alone_.  _she stands
immobile with a look of unutterable sorrow on her face_.]

                                 act drop




third act


                                  scene

    _the picture gallery at hunstanton_.  _door at back leading on to
                                terrace_.

[lord illingworth _and_ gerald, r.c.  lord illingworth _lolling on a
sofa_.  gerald _in a chair_.]

lord illingworth.  thoroughly sensible woman, your mother, gerald.  i
knew she would come round in the end.

gerald.  my mother is awfully conscientious, lord illingworth, and i know
she doesn’t think i am educated enough to be your secretary.  she is
perfectly right, too.  i was fearfully idle when i was at school, and i
couldn’t pass an examination now to save my life.

lord illingworth.  my dear gerald, examinations are of no value
whatsoever.  if a man is a gentleman, he knows quite enough, and if he is
not a gentleman, whatever he knows is bad for him.

gerald.  but i am so ignorant of the world, lord illingworth.

lord illingworth.  don’t be afraid, gerald.  remember that you’ve got on
your side the most wonderful thing in the world—youth!  there is nothing
like youth.  the middle-aged are mortgaged to life.  the old are in
life’s lumber-room.  but youth is the lord of life.  youth has a kingdom
waiting for it.  every one is born a king, and most people die in exile,
like most kings.  to win back my youth, gerald, there is nothing i
wouldn’t do—except take exercise, get up early, or be a useful member of
the community.

gerald.  but you don’t call yourself old, lord illingworth?

lord illingworth.  i am old enough to be your father, gerald.

gerald.  i don’t remember my father; he died years ago.

lord illingworth.  so lady hunstanton told me.

gerald.  it is very curious, my mother never talks to me about my father.
i sometimes think she must have married beneath her.

lord illingworth.  [_winces slightly_.]  really?  [_goes over and puts
his hand on_ gerald’s _shoulder_.]  you have missed not having a father,
i suppose, gerald?

gerald.  oh, no; my mother has been so good to me.  no one ever had such
a mother as i have had.

lord illingworth.  i am quite sure of that.  still i should imagine that
most mothers don’t quite understand their sons.  don’t realise, i mean,
that a son has ambitions, a desire to see life, to make himself a name.
after all, gerald, you couldn’t be expected to pass all your life in such
a hole as wrockley, could you?

gerald.  oh, no!  it would be dreadful!

lord illingworth.  a mother’s love is very touching, of course, but it is
often curiously selfish.  i mean, there is a good deal of selfishness in
it.

gerald.  [_slowly_.]  i suppose there is.

lord illingworth.  your mother is a thoroughly good woman.  but good
women have such limited views of life, their horizon is so small, their
interests are so petty, aren’t they?

gerald.  they are awfully interested, certainly, in things we don’t care
much about.

lord illingworth.  i suppose your mother is very religious, and that sort
of thing.

gerald.  oh, yes, she’s always going to church.

lord illingworth.  ah! she is not modern, and to be modern is the only
thing worth being nowadays.  you want to be modern, don’t you, gerald?
you want to know life as it really is.  not to be put of with any
old-fashioned theories about life.  well, what you have to do at present
is simply to fit yourself for the best society.  a man who can dominate a
london dinner-table can dominate the world.  the future belongs to the
dandy.  it is the exquisites who are going to rule.

gerald.  i should like to wear nice things awfully, but i have always
been told that a man should not think too much about his clothes.

lord illingworth.  people nowadays are so absolutely superficial that
they don’t understand the philosophy of the superficial.  by the way,
gerald, you should learn how to tie your tie better.  sentiment is all
very well for the button-hole.  but the essential thing for a necktie is
style.  a well-tied tie is the first serious step in life.

gerald.  [_laughing_.]  i might be able to learn how to tie a tie, lord
illingworth, but i should never be able to talk as you do.  i don’t know
how to talk.

lord illingworth.  oh! talk to every woman as if you loved her, and to
every man as if he bored you, and at the end of your first season you
will have the reputation of possessing the most perfect social tact.

gerald.  but it is very difficult to get into society isn’t it?

lord illingworth.  to get into the best society, nowadays, one has either
to feed people, amuse people, or shock people—that is all!

gerald.  i suppose society is wonderfully delightful!

lord illingworth.  to be in it is merely a bore.  but to be out of it
simply a tragedy.  society is a necessary thing.  no man has any real
success in this world unless he has got women to back him, and women rule
society.  if you have not got women on your side you are quite over.  you
might just as well be a barrister, or a stockbroker, or a journalist at
once.

gerald.  it is very difficult to understand women, is it not?

lord illingworth.  you should never try to understand them.  women are
pictures.  men are problems.  if you want to know what a woman really
means—which, by the way, is always a dangerous thing to do—look at her,
don’t listen to her.

gerald.  but women are awfully clever, aren’t they?

lord illingworth.  one should always tell them so.  but, to the
philosopher, my dear gerald, women represent the triumph of matter over
mind—just as men represent the triumph of mind over morals.

gerald.  how then can women have so much power as you say they have?

lord illingworth.  the history of women is the history of the worst form
of tyranny the world has ever known.  the tyranny of the weak over the
strong.  it is the only tyranny that lasts.

gerald.  but haven’t women got a refining influence?

lord illingworth.  nothing refines but the intellect.

gerald.  still, there are many different kinds of women, aren’t there?

lord illingworth.  only two kinds in society: the plain and the coloured.

gerald.  but there are good women in society, aren’t there?

lord illingworth.  far too many.

gerald.  but do you think women shouldn’t be good?

lord illingworth.  one should never tell them so, they’d all become good
at once.  women are a fascinatingly wilful sex.  every woman is a rebel,
and usually in wild revolt against herself.

gerald.  you have never been married, lord illingworth, have you?

lord illingworth.  men marry because they are tired; women because they
are curious.  both are disappointed.

gerald.  but don’t you think one can be happy when one is married?

lord illingworth.  perfectly happy.  but the happiness of a married man,
my dear gerald, depends on the people he has not married.

gerald.  but if one is in love?

lord illingworth.  one should always be in love.  that is the reason one
should never marry.

gerald.  love is a very wonderful thing, isn’t it?

lord illingworth.  when one is in love one begins by deceiving oneself.
and one ends by deceiving others.  that is what the world calls a
romance.  but a really _grande passion_ is comparatively rare nowadays.
it is the privilege of people who have nothing to do.  that is the one
use of the idle classes in a country, and the only possible explanation
of us harfords.

gerald.  harfords, lord illingworth?

lord illingworth.  that is my family name.  you should study the peerage,
gerald.  it is the one book a young man about town should know
thoroughly, and it is the best thing in fiction the english have ever
done.  and now, gerald, you are going into a perfectly new life with me,
and i want you to know how to live.  [mrs. arbuthnot _appears on terrace
behind_.]  for the world has been made by fools that wise men should live
in it!

[_enter_ l.c. lady hunstanton _and_ dr. daubeny.]

lady hunstanton.  ah! here you are, dear lord illingworth.  well, i
suppose you have been telling our young friend, gerald, what his new
duties are to be, and giving him a great deal of good advice over a
pleasant cigarette.

lord illingworth.  i have been giving him the best of advice, lady
hunstanton, and the best of cigarettes.

lady hunstanton.  i am so sorry i was not here to listen to you, but i
suppose i am too old now to learn.  except from you, dear archdeacon,
when you are in your nice pulpit.  but then i always know what you are
going to say, so i don’t feel alarmed.  [_sees_ mrs. arbuthnot.]  ah!
dear mrs. arbuthnot, do come and join us.  come, dear.  [_enter_ mrs.
arbuthnot.]  gerald has been having such a long talk with lord
illingworth; i am sure you must feel very much flattered at the pleasant
way in which everything has turned out for him.  let us sit down.  [_they
sit down_.]  and how is your beautiful embroidery going on?

mrs. arbuthnot.  i am always at work, lady hunstanton.

lady hunstanton.  mrs. daubeny embroiders a little, too, doesn’t she?

the archdeacon.  she was very deft with her needle once, quite a dorcas.
but the gout has crippled her fingers a good deal.  she has not touched
the tambour frame for nine or ten years.  but she has many other
amusements.  she is very much interested in her own health.

lady hunstanton.  ah! that is always a nice distraction, in it not?  now,
what are you talking about, lord illingworth?  do tell us.

lord illingworth.  i was on the point of explaining to gerald that the
world has always laughed at its own tragedies, that being the only way in
which it has been able to bear them.  and that, consequently, whatever
the world has treated seriously belongs to the comedy side of things.

lady hunstanton.  now i am quite out of my depth.  i usually am when lord
illingworth says anything.  and the humane society is most careless.
they never rescue me.  i am left to sink.  i have a dim idea, dear lord
illingworth, that you are always on the side of the sinners, and i know i
always try to be on the side of the saints, but that is as far as i get.
and after all, it may be merely the fancy of a drowning person.

lord illingworth.  the only difference between the saint and the sinner
is that every saint has a past, and every sinner has a future.

lady hunstanton.  ah! that quite does for me.  i haven’t a word to say.
you and i, dear mrs. arbuthnot, are behind the age.  we can’t follow lord
illingworth.  too much care was taken with our education, i am afraid.
to have been well brought up is a great drawback nowadays.  it shuts one
out from so much.

mrs. arbuthnot.  i should be sorry to follow lord illingworth in any of
his opinions.

lady hunstanton.  you are quite right, dear.

[gerald _shrugs his shoulders and looks irritably over at his mother_.
_enter_ lady caroline.]

lady caroline.  jane, have you seen john anywhere?

lady hunstanton.  you needn’t be anxious about him, dear.  he is with
lady stutfield; i saw them some time ago, in the yellow drawing-room.
they seem quite happy together.  you are not going, caroline?  pray sit
down.

lady caroline.  i think i had better look after john.

[_exit_ lady caroline.]

lady hunstanton.  it doesn’t do to pay men so much attention.  and
caroline has really nothing to be anxious about.  lady stutfield is very
sympathetic.  she is just as sympathetic about one thing as she is about
another.  a beautiful nature.

[_enter_ sir john _and_ mrs. allonby.]

ah! here is sir john!  and with mrs. allonby too!  i suppose it was mrs.
allonby i saw him with.  sir john, caroline has been looking everywhere
for you.

mrs. allonby.  we have been waiting for her in the music-room, dear lady
hunstanton.

lady hunstanton.  ah! the music-room, of course.  i thought it was the
yellow drawing-room, my memory is getting so defective.  [_to the_
archdeacon.]  mrs. daubeny has a wonderful memory, hasn’t she?

the archdeacon.  she used to be quite remarkable for her memory, but
since her last attack she recalls chiefly the events of her early
childhood.  but she finds great pleasure in such retrospections, great
pleasure.

[_enter_ lady stutfield _and_ mr. kelvil.]

lady hunstanton.  ah! dear lady stutfield! and what has mr. kelvil been
talking to you about?

lady stutfield.  about bimetallism, as well as i remember.

lady hunstanton.  bimetallism!  is that quite a nice subject?  however, i
know people discuss everything very freely nowadays.  what did sir john
talk to you about, dear mrs. allonby?

mrs. allonby.  about patagonia.

lady hunstanton.  really?  what a remote topic!  but very improving, i
have no doubt.

mrs. allonby.  he has been most interesting on the subject of patagonia.
savages seem to have quite the same views as cultured people on almost
all subjects.  they are excessively advanced.

lady hunstanton.  what do they do?

mrs. allonby.  apparently everything.

lady hunstanton.  well, it is very gratifying, dear archdeacon, is it
not, to find that human nature is permanently one.—on the whole, the
world is the same world, is it not?

lord illingworth.  the world is simply divided into two classes—those who
believe the incredible, like the public—and those who do the improbable—

mrs. allonby.  like yourself?

lord illingworth.  yes; i am always astonishing myself.  it is the only
thing that makes life worth living.

lady stutfield.  and what have you been doing lately that astonishes you?

lord illingworth.  i have been discovering all kinds of beautiful
qualities in my own nature.

mrs. allonby.  ah! don’t become quite perfect all at once.  do it
gradually!

lord illingworth.  i don’t intend to grow perfect at all.  at least, i
hope i shan’t.  it would be most inconvenient.  women love us for our
defects.  if we have enough of them, they will forgive us everything,
even our gigantic intellects.

mrs. allonby.  it is premature to ask us to forgive analysis.  we forgive
adoration; that is quite as much as should be expected from us.

[_enter_ lord alfred.  _he joins_ lady stutfield.]

lady hunstanton.  ah! we women should forgive everything, shouldn’t we,
dear mrs. arbuthnot?  i am sure you agree with me in that.

mrs. arbuthnot.  i do not, lady hunstanton.  i think there are many
things women should never forgive.

lady hunstanton.  what sort of things?

mrs. arbuthnot.  the ruin of another woman’s life.

[_moves slowly away to back of stage_.]

lady hunstanton.  ah! those things are very sad, no doubt, but i believe
there are admirable homes where people of that kind are looked after and
reformed, and i think on the whole that the secret of life is to take
things very, very easily.

mrs. allonby.  the secret of life is never to have an emotion that is
unbecoming.

lady stutfield.  the secret of life is to appreciate the pleasure of
being terribly, terribly deceived.

kelvil.  the secret of life is to resist temptation, lady stutfield.

lord illingworth.  there is no secret of life.  life’s aim, if it has
one, is simply to be always looking for temptations.  there are not
nearly enough.  i sometimes pass a whole day without coming across a
single one.  it is quite dreadful.  it makes one so nervous about the
future.

lady hunstanton.  [_shakes her fan at him_.]  i don’t know how it is,
dear lord illingworth, but everything you have said to-day seems to me
excessively immoral.  it has been most interesting, listening to you.

lord illingworth.  all thought is immoral.  its very essence is
destruction.  if you think of anything, you kill it.  nothing survives
being thought of.

lady hunstanton.  i don’t understand a word, lord illingworth.  but i
have no doubt it is all quite true.  personally, i have very little to
reproach myself with, on the score of thinking.  i don’t believe in women
thinking too much.  women should think in moderation, as they should do
all things in moderation.

lord illingworth.  moderation is a fatal thing, lady hunstanton.  nothing
succeeds like excess.

lady hunstanton.  i hope i shall remember that.  it sounds an admirable
maxim.  but i’m beginning to forget everything.  it’s a great misfortune.

lord illingworth.  it is one of your most fascinating qualities, lady
hunstanton.  no woman should have a memory.  memory in a woman is the
beginning of dowdiness.  one can always tell from a woman’s bonnet
whether she has got a memory or not.

lady hunstanton.  how charming you are, dear lord illingworth.  you
always find out that one’s most glaring fault is one’s most important
virtue.  you have the most comforting views of life.

[_enter_ farquhar.]

farquhar.  doctor daubeny’s carriage!

lady hunstanton.  my dear archdeacon!  it is only half-past ten.

the archdeacon.  [_rising_.]  i am afraid i must go, lady hunstanton.
tuesday is always one of mrs. daubeny’s bad nights.

lady hunstanton.  [_rising_.]  well, i won’t keep you from her.  [_goes
with him towards door_.]  i have told farquhar to put a brace of
partridge into the carriage.  mrs. daubeny may fancy them.

the archdeacon.  it is very kind of you, but mrs. daubeny never touches
solids now.  lives entirely on jellies.  but she is wonderfully cheerful,
wonderfully cheerful.  she has nothing to complain of.

[_exit with_ lady hunstanton.]

mrs. allonby.  [_goes over to_ lord illingworth.]  there is a beautiful
moon to-night.

lord illingworth.  let us go and look at it.  to look at anything that is
inconstant is charming nowadays.

mrs. allonby.  you have your looking-glass.

lord illingworth.  it is unkind.  it merely shows me my wrinkles.

mrs. allonby.  mine is better behaved.  it never tells me the truth.

lord illingworth.  then it is in love with you.

[_exeunt_ sir john, lady stutfield, mr. kelvil _and_ lord alfred.]

gerald.  [_to_ lord illingworth]  may i come too?

lord illingworth.  do, my dear boy.  [_moves towards with_ mrs. allonby
_and_ gerald.]

[lady caroline _enters_, _looks rapidly round and goes off in opposite
direction to that taken by_ sir john _and_ lady stutfield.]

mrs. arbuthnot.  gerald!

gerald.  what, mother!

[_exit_ lord illingworth _with_ mrs. allonby.]

mrs. arbuthnot.  it is getting late.  let us go home.

gerald.  my dear mother.  do let us wait a little longer.  lord
illingworth is so delightful, and, by the way, mother, i have a great
surprise for you.  we are starting for india at the end of this month.

mrs. arbuthnot.  let us go home.

gerald.  if you really want to, of course, mother, but i must bid
good-bye to lord illingworth first.  i’ll be back in five minutes.
[_exit_.]

mrs. arbuthnot.  let him leave me if he chooses, but not with him—not
with him!  i couldn’t bear it.  [_walks up and down_.]

[_enter_ hester.]

hester.  what a lovely night it is, mrs. arbuthnot.

mrs. arbuthnot.  is it?

hester.  mrs. arbuthnot, i wish you would let us be friends.  you are so
different from the other women here.  when you came into the drawing-room
this evening, somehow you brought with you a sense of what is good and
pure in life.  i had been foolish.  there are things that are right to
say, but that may be said at the wrong time and to the wrong people.

mrs. arbuthnot.  i heard what you said.  i agree with it, miss worsley.

hester.  i didn’t know you had heard it.  but i knew you would agree with
me.  a woman who has sinned should be punished, shouldn’t she?

mrs. arbuthnot.  yes.

hester.  she shouldn’t be allowed to come into the society of good men
and women?

mrs. arbuthnot.  she should not.

hester.  and the man should be punished in the same way?

mrs. arbuthnot.  in the same way.  and the children, if there are
children, in the same way also?

hester.  yes, it is right that the sins of the parents should be visited
on the children.  it is a just law.  it is god’s law.

mrs. arbuthnot.  it is one of god’s terrible laws.

[_moves away to fireplace_.]

hester.  you are distressed about your son leaving you, mrs. arbuthnot?

mrs. arbuthnot.  yes.

hester.  do you like him going away with lord illingworth?  of course
there is position, no doubt, and money, but position and money are not
everything, are they?

mrs. arbuthnot.  they are nothing; they bring misery.

hester.  then why do you let your son go with him?

mrs. arbuthnot.  he wishes it himself.

hester.  but if you asked him he would stay, would he not?

mrs. arbuthnot.  he has set his heart on going.

hester.  he couldn’t refuse you anything.  he loves you too much.  ask
him to stay.  let me send him in to you.  he is on the terrace at this
moment with lord illingworth.  i heard them laughing together as i passed
through the music-room.

mrs. arbuthnot.  don’t trouble, miss worsley, i can wait.  it is of no
consequence.

hester.  no, i’ll tell him you want him.  do—do ask him to stay.  [_exit_
hester.]

mrs. arbuthnot.  he won’t come—i know he won’t come.

[enter lady caroline.  _she looks round anxiously_.  _enter_ gerald.]

lady caroline.  mr. arbuthnot, may i ask you is sir john anywhere on the
terrace?

gerald.  no, lady caroline, he is not on the terrace.

lady caroline.  it is very curious.  it is time for him to retire.

[_exit_ lady caroline.]

gerald.  dear mother, i am afraid i kept you waiting.  i forgot all about
it.  i am so happy to-night, mother; i have never been so happy.

mrs. arbuthnot.  at the prospect of going away?

gerald.  don’t put it like that, mother.  of course i am sorry to leave
you.  why, you are the best mother in the whole world.  but after all, as
lord illingworth says, it is impossible to live in such a place as
wrockley.  you don’t mind it.  but i’m ambitions; i want something more
than that.  i want to have a career.  i want to do something that will
make you proud of me, and lord illingworth is going to help me.  he is
going to do everything for me.

mrs. arbuthnot.  gerald, don’t go away with lord illingworth.  i implore
you not to.  gerald, i beg you!

gerald.  mother, how changeable you are!  you don’t seem to know your own
mind for a single moment.  an hour and a half ago in the drawing-room you
agreed to the whole thing; now you turn round and make objections, and
try to force me to give up my one chance in life.  yes, my one chance.
you don’t suppose that men like lord illingworth are to be found every
day, do you, mother?  it is very strange that when i have had such a
wonderful piece of good luck, the one person to put difficulties in my
way should be my own mother.  besides, you know, mother, i love hester
worsley.  who could help loving her?  i love her more than i have ever
told you, far more.  and if i had a position, if i had prospects, i
could—i could ask her to—don’t you understand now, mother, what it means
to me to be lord illingworth’s secretary?  to start like that is to find
a career ready for one—before one—waiting for one.  if i were lord
illingworth’s secretary i could ask hester to be my wife.  as a wretched
bank clerk with a hundred a year it would be an impertinence.

mrs. arbuthnot.  i fear you need have no hopes of miss worsley.  i know
her views on life.  she has just told them to me.  [_a pause_.]

gerald.  then i have my ambition left, at any rate.  that is something—i
am glad i have that!  you have always tried to crush my ambition,
mother—haven’t you?  you have told me that the world is a wicked place,
that success is not worth having, that society is shallow, and all that
sort of thing—well, i don’t believe it, mother.  i think the world must
be delightful.  i think society must be exquisite.  i think success is a
thing worth having.  you have been wrong in all that you taught me,
mother, quite wrong.  lord illingworth is a successful man.  he is a
fashionable man.  he is a man who lives in the world and for it.  well, i
would give anything to be just like lord illingworth.

mrs. arbuthnot.  i would sooner see you dead.

gerald.  mother, what is your objection to lord illingworth?  tell
me—tell me right out.  what is it?

mrs. arbuthnot.  he is a bad man.

gerald.  in what way bad?  i don’t understand what you mean.

mrs. arbuthnot.  i will tell you.

gerald.  i suppose you think him bad, because he doesn’t believe the same
things as you do.  well, men are different from women, mother.  it is
natural that they should have different views.

mrs. arbuthnot.  it is not what lord illingworth believes, or what he
does not believe, that makes him bad.  it is what he is.

gerald.  mother, is it something you know of him?  something you actually
know?

mrs. arbuthnot.  it is something i know.

gerald.  something you are quite sure of?

mrs. arbuthnot.  quite sure of.

gerald.  how long have you known it?

mrs. arbuthnot.  for twenty years.

gerald.  is it fair to go back twenty years in any man’s career?  and
what have you or i to do with lord illingworth’s early life?  what
business is it of ours?

mrs. arbuthnot.  what this man has been, he is now, and will be always.

gerald.  mother, tell me what lord illingworth did?  if he did anything
shameful, i will not go away with him.  surely you know me well enough
for that?

mrs. arbuthnot.  gerald, come near to me.  quite close to me, as you used
to do when you were a little boy, when you were mother’s own boy.
[gerald _sits down betide his mother_.  _she runs her fingers through his
hair_, _and strokes his hands_.]  gerald, there was a girl once, she was
very young, she was little over eighteen at the time.  george
harford—that was lord illingworth’s name then—george harford met her.
she knew nothing about life.  he—knew everything.  he made this girl love
him.  he made her love him so much that she left her father’s house with
him one morning.  she loved him so much, and he had promised to marry
her!  he had solemnly promised to marry her, and she had believed him.
she was very young, and—and ignorant of what life really is.  but he put
the marriage off from week to week, and month to month.—she trusted in
him all the while.  she loved him.—before her child was born—for she had
a child—she implored him for the child’s sake to marry her, that the
child might have a name, that her sin might not be visited on the child,
who was innocent.  he refused.  after the child was born she left him,
taking the child away, and her life was ruined, and her soul ruined, and
all that was sweet, and good, and pure in her ruined also.  she suffered
terribly—she suffers now.  she will always suffer.  for her there is no
joy, no peace, no atonement.  she is a woman who drags a chain like a
guilty thing.  she is a woman who wears a mask, like a thing that is a
leper.  the fire cannot purify her.  the waters cannot quench her
anguish.  nothing can heal her! no anodyne can give her sleep! no poppies
forgetfulness!  she is lost!  she is a lost soul!—that is why i call lord
illingworth a bad man.  that is why i don’t want my boy to be with him.

gerald.  my dear mother, it all sounds very tragic, of course.  but i
dare say the girl was just as much to blame as lord illingworth
was.—after all, would a really nice girl, a girl with any nice feelings
at all, go away from her home with a man to whom she was not married, and
live with him as his wife?  no nice girl would.

mrs. arbuthnot.  [_after a pause_.]  gerald, i withdraw all my
objections.  you are at liberty to go away with lord illingworth, when
and where you choose.

gerald.  dear mother, i knew you wouldn’t stand in my way.  you are the
best woman god ever made.  and, as for lord illingworth, i don’t believe
he is capable of anything infamous or base.  i can’t believe it of him—i
can’t.

hester.  [_outside_.]  let me go!  let me go!  [_enter_ hester _in
terror_, _and rushes over to_ gerald _and flings herself in his arms_.]

hester.  oh! save me—save me from him!

gerald.  from whom?

hester.  he has insulted me!  horribly insulted me!  save me!

gerald.  who?  who has dared—?

[lord illingworth _enters at back of stage_.  hester _breaks from_
gerald’s _arms and points to him_.]

gerald  [_he is quite beside himself with rage and indignation_.]  lord
illingworth, you have insulted the purest thing on god’s earth, a thing
as pure as my own mother.  you have insulted the woman i love most in the
world with my own mother.  as there is a god in heaven, i will kill you!

mrs. arbuthnot.  [_rushing across and catching hold of him_]  no! no!

gerald.  [_thrusting her back_.]  don’t hold me, mother.  don’t hold
me—i’ll kill him!

mrs. arbuthnot.  gerald!

gerald.  let me go, i say!

mrs. arbuthnot.  stop, gerald, stop!  he is your own father!

[gerald _clutches his mother’s hands and looks into her face_.  _she
sinks slowly on the ground in shame_.  hester _steals towards the door_.
lord illingworth _frowns and bites his lip_.  _after a time_ gerald
_raises his mother up_, _puts his am round her_, _and leads her from the
room_.]

                                 act drop




fourth act


                                  scene

_sitting-room at mrs. arbuthnot’s_.  _large open french window at back_,
_looking on to garden_.  _doors_ r.c. _and_ l.c.

[gerald arbuthnot _writing at table_.]

[_enter_ alice r.c. _followed by_ lady hunstanton _and_ mrs. allonby.]

alice.  lady hunstanton and mrs. allonby.

[_exit_ l.c.]

lady hunstanton.  good morning, gerald.

gerald.  [_rising_.]  good morning, lady hunstanton.  good morning, mrs.
allonby.

lady hunstanton.  [_sitting down_.]  we came to inquire for your dear
mother, gerald.  i hope she is better?

gerald.  my mother has not come down yet, lady hunstanton.

lady hunstanton.  ah, i am afraid the heat was too much for her last
night.  i think there must have been thunder in the air.  or perhaps it
was the music.  music makes one feel so romantic—at least it always gets
on one’s nerves.

mrs. allonby.  it’s the same thing, nowadays.

lady hunstanton.  i am so glad i don’t know what you mean, dear.  i am
afraid you mean something wrong.  ah, i see you’re examining mrs.
arbuthnot’s pretty room.  isn’t it nice and old-fashioned?

mrs. allonby.  [_surveying the room through her lorgnette_.]  it looks
quite the happy english home.

lady hunstanton.  that’s just the word, dear; that just describes it.
one feels your mother’s good influence in everything she has about her,
gerald.

mrs. allonby.  lord illingworth says that all influence is bad, but that
a good influence is the worst in the world.

lady hunstanton.  when lord illingworth knows mrs. arbuthnot better he
will change his mind.  i must certainly bring him here.

mrs. allonby.  i should like to see lord illingworth in a happy english
home.

lady hunstanton.  it would do him a great deal of good, dear.  most women
in london, nowadays, seem to furnish their rooms with nothing but
orchids, foreigners, and french novels.  but here we have the room of a
sweet saint.  fresh natural flowers, books that don’t shock one, pictures
that one can look at without blushing.

mrs. allonby.  but i like blushing.

lady hunstanton.  well, there _is_ a good deal to be said for blushing,
if one can do it at the proper moment.  poor dear hunstanton used to tell
me i didn’t blush nearly often enough.  but then he was so very
particular.  he wouldn’t let me know any of his men friends, except those
who were over seventy, like poor lord ashton: who afterwards, by the way,
was brought into the divorce court.  a most unfortunate case.

mrs. allonby.  i delight in men over seventy.  they always offer one the
devotion of a lifetime.  i think seventy an ideal age for a man.

lady hunstanton.  she is quite incorrigible, gerald, isn’t she?
by-the-by, gerald, i hope your dear mother will come and see me more
often now.  you and lord illingworth start almost immediately, don’t you?

gerald.  i have given up my intention of being lord illingworth’s
secretary.

lady hunstanton.  surely not, gerald!  it would be most unwise of you.
what reason can you have?

gerald.  i don’t think i should be suitable for the post.

mrs. allonby.  i wish lord illingworth would ask me to be his secretary.
but he says i am not serious enough.

lady hunstanton.  my dear, you really mustn’t talk like that in this
house.  mrs. arbuthnot doesn’t know anything about the wicked society in
which we all live.  she won’t go into it.  she is far too good.  i
consider it was a great honour her coming to me last night.  it gave
quite an atmosphere of respectability to the party.

mrs. allonby.  ah, that must have been what you thought was thunder in
the air.

lady hunstanton.  my dear, how can you say that?  there is no resemblance
between the two things at all.  but really, gerald, what do you mean by
not being suitable?

gerald.  lord illingworth’s views of life and mine are too different.

lady hunstanton.  but, my dear gerald, at your age you shouldn’t have any
views of life.  they are quite out of place.  you must be guided by
others in this matter.  lord illingworth has made you the most flattering
offer, and travelling with him you would see the world—as much of it, at
least, as one should look at—under the best auspices possible, and stay
with all the right people, which is so important at this solemn moment in
your career.

gerald.  i don’t want to see the world: i’ve seen enough of it.

mrs. allonby.  i hope you don’t think you have exhausted life, mr.
arbuthnot.  when a man says that, one knows that life has exhausted him.

gerald.  i don’t wish to leave my mother.

lady hunstanton.  now, gerald, that is pure laziness on your part.  not
leave your mother!  if i were your mother i would insist on your going.

[_enter_ alice l.c.]

alice.  mrs. arbuthnot’s compliments, my lady, but she has a bad
headache, and cannot see any one this morning.  [_exit_ r.c.]

lady hunstanton.  [_rising_.]  a bad headache!  i am so sorry!  perhaps
you’ll bring her up to hunstanton this afternoon, if she is better,
gerald.

gerald.  i am afraid not this afternoon, lady hunstanton.

lady hunstanton.  well, to-morrow, then.  ah, if you had a father,
gerald, he wouldn’t let you waste your life here.  he would send you off
with lord illingworth at once.  but mothers are so weak.  they give up to
their sons in everything.  we are all heart, all heart.  come, dear, i
must call at the rectory and inquire for mrs. daubeny, who, i am afraid,
is far from well.  it is wonderful how the archdeacon bears up, quite
wonderful.  he is the most sympathetic of husbands.  quite a model.
good-bye, gerald, give my fondest love to your mother.

mrs. allonby.  good-bye, mr. arbuthnot.

gerald.  good-bye.

[_exit_ lady hunstanton _and_ mrs. allonby.  gerald _sits down and reads
over his letter_.]

gerald.  what name can i sign?  i, who have no right to any name.
[_signs name_, _puts letter into envelope_, _addresses it_, _and is about
to seal it_, _when door_ l.c. _opens and_ mrs. arbuthnot _enters_.
gerald _lays down sealing-wax_.  _mother and son look at each other_.]

lady hunstanton.  [_through french window at the back_.]  good-bye again,
gerald.  we are taking the short cut across your pretty garden.  now,
remember my advice to you—start at once with lord illingworth.

mrs. allonby.  _au revoir_, mr. arbuthnot.  mind you bring me back
something nice from your travels—not an indian shawl—on no account an
indian shawl.

[_exeunt_.]

gerald.  mother, i have just written to him.

mrs. arbuthnot.  to whom?

gerald.  to my father.  i have written to tell him to come here at four
o’clock this afternoon.

mrs. arbuthnot.  he shall not come here.  he shall not cross the
threshold of my house.

gerald.  he must come.

mrs. arbuthnot.  gerald, if you are going away with lord illingworth, go
at once.  go before it kills me: but don’t ask me to meet him.

gerald.  mother, you don’t understand.  nothing in the world would induce
me to go away with lord illingworth, or to leave you.  surely you know me
well enough for that.  no: i have written to him to say—

mrs. arbuthnot.  what can you have to say to him?

gerald.  can’t you guess, mother, what i have written in this letter?

mrs. arbuthnot.  no.

gerald.  mother, surely you can.  think, think what must be done, now, at
once, within the next few days.

mrs. arbuthnot.  there is nothing to be done.

gerald.  i have written to lord illingworth to tell him that he must
marry you.

mrs. arbuthnot.  marry me?

gerald.  mother, i will force him to do it.  the wrong that has been done
you must be repaired.  atonement must be made.  justice may be slow,
mother, but it comes in the end.  in a few days you shall be lord
illingworth’s lawful wife.

mrs. arbuthnot.  but, gerald—

gerald.  i will insist upon his doing it.  i will make him do it: he will
not dare to refuse.

mrs. arbuthnot.  but, gerald, it is i who refuse.  i will not marry lord
illingworth.

gerald.  not marry him?  mother!

mrs. arbuthnot.  i will not marry him.

gerald.  but you don’t understand: it is for your sake i am talking, not
for mine.  this marriage, this necessary marriage, this marriage which
for obvious reasons must inevitably take place, will not help me, will
not give me a name that will be really, rightly mine to bear.  but surely
it will be something for you, that you, my mother, should, however late,
become the wife of the man who is my father.  will not that be something?

mrs. arbuthnot.  i will not marry him.

gerald.  mother, you must.

mrs. arbuthnot.  i will not.  you talk of atonement for a wrong done.
what atonement can be made to me?  there is no atonement possible.  i am
disgraced: he is not.  that is all.  it is the usual history of a man and
a woman as it usually happens, as it always happens.  and the ending is
the ordinary ending.  the woman suffers.  the man goes free.

gerald.  i don’t know if that is the ordinary ending, mother: i hope it
is not.  but your life, at any rate, shall not end like that.  the man
shall make whatever reparation is possible.  it is not enough.  it does
not wipe out the past, i know that.  but at least it makes the future
better, better for you, mother.

mrs. arbuthnot.  i refuse to marry lord illingworth.

gerald.  if he came to you himself and asked you to be his wife you would
give him a different answer.  remember, he is my father.

mrs. arbuthnot.  if he came himself, which he will not do, my answer
would be the same.  remember i am your mother.

gerald.  mother, you make it terribly difficult for me by talking like
that; and i can’t understand why you won’t look at this matter from the
right, from the only proper standpoint.  it is to take away the
bitterness out of your life, to take away the shadow that lies on your
name, that this marriage must take place.  there is no alternative: and
after the marriage you and i can go away together.  but the marriage must
take place first.  it is a duty that you owe, not merely to yourself, but
to all other women—yes: to all the other women in the world, lest he
betray more.

mrs. arbuthnot.  i owe nothing to other women.  there is not one of them
to help me.  there is not one woman in the world to whom i could go for
pity, if i would take it, or for sympathy, if i could win it.  women are
hard on each other.  that girl, last night, good though she is, fled from
the room as though i were a tainted thing.  she was right.  i am a
tainted thing.  but my wrongs are my own, and i will bear them alone.  i
must bear them alone.  what have women who have not sinned to do with me,
or i with them?  we do not understand each other.

[_enter_ hester _behind_.]

gerald.  i implore you to do what i ask you.

mrs. arbuthnot.  what son has ever asked of his mother to make so hideous
a sacrifice?  none.

gerald.  what mother has ever refused to marry the father of her own
child?  none.

mrs. arbuthnot.  let me be the first, then.  i will not do it.

gerald.  mother, you believe in religion, and you brought me up to
believe in it also.  well, surely your religion, the religion that you
taught me when i was a boy, mother, must tell you that i am right.  you
know it, you feel it.

mrs. arbuthnot.  i do not know it.  i do not feel it, nor will i ever
stand before god’s altar and ask god’s blessing on so hideous a mockery
as a marriage between me and george harford.  i will not say the words
the church bids us to say.  i will not say them.  i dare not.  how could
i swear to love the man i loathe, to honour him who wrought you
dishonour, to obey him who, in his mastery, made me to sin?  no: marriage
is a sacrament for those who love each other.  it is not for such as him,
or such as me.  gerald, to save you from the world’s sneers and taunts i
have lied to the world.  for twenty years i have lied to the world.  i
could not tell the world the truth.  who can, ever?  but not for my own
sake will i lie to god, and in god’s presence.  no, gerald, no ceremony,
church-hallowed or state-made, shall ever bind me to george harford.  it
may be that i am too bound to him already, who, robbing me, yet left me
richer, so that in the mire of my life i found the pearl of price, or
what i thought would be so.

gerald.  i don’t understand you now.

mrs. arbuthnot.  men don’t understand what mothers are.  i am no
different from other women except in the wrong done me and the wrong i
did, and my very heavy punishments and great disgrace.  and yet, to bear
you i had to look on death.  to nurture you i had to wrestle with it.
death fought with me for you.  all women have to fight with death to keep
their children.  death, being childless, wants our children from us.
gerald, when you were naked i clothed you, when you were hungry i gave
you food.  night and day all that long winter i tended you.  no office is
too mean, no care too lowly for the thing we women love—and oh! how _i_
loved _you_.  not hannah, samuel more.  and you needed love, for you were
weakly, and only love could have kept you alive.  only love can keep any
one alive.  and boys are careless often and without thinking give pain,
and we always fancy that when they come to man’s estate and know us
better they will repay us.  but it is not so.  the world draws them from
our side, and they make friends with whom they are happier than they are
with us, and have amusements from which we are barred, and interests that
are not ours: and they are unjust to us often, for when they find life
bitter they blame us for it, and when they find it sweet we do not taste
its sweetness with them . . . you made many friends and went into their
houses and were glad with them, and i, knowing my secret, did not dare to
follow, but stayed at home and closed the door, shut out the sun and sat
in darkness.  what should i have done in honest households?  my past was
ever with me. . . . and you thought i didn’t care for the pleasant things
of life.  i tell you i longed for them, but did not dare to touch them,
feeling i had no right.  you thought i was happier working amongst the
poor.  that was my mission, you imagined.  it was not, but where else was
i to go?  the sick do not ask if the hand that smooths their pillow is
pure, nor the dying care if the lips that touch their brow have known the
kiss of sin.  it was you i thought of all the time; i gave to them the
love you did not need: lavished on them a love that was not theirs . . .
and you thought i spent too much of my time in going to church, and in
church duties.  but where else could i turn?  god’s house is the only
house where sinners are made welcome, and you were always in my heart,
gerald, too much in my heart.  for, though day after day, at morn or
evensong, i have knelt in god’s house, i have never repented of my sin.
how could i repent of my sin when you, my love, were its fruit!  even now
that you are bitter to me i cannot repent.  i do not.  you are more to me
than innocence.  i would rather be your mother—oh! much rather!—than have
been always pure . . . oh, don’t you see? don’t you understand?  it is my
dishonour that has made you so dear to me.  it is my disgrace that has
bound you so closely to me.  it is the price i paid for you—the price of
soul and body—that makes me love you as i do.  oh, don’t ask me to do
this horrible thing.  child of my shame, be still the child of my shame!

gerald.  mother, i didn’t know you loved me so much as that.  and i will
be a better son to you than i have been.  and you and i must never leave
each other . . . but, mother . . . i can’t help it . . . you must become
my father’s wife.  you must marry him.  it is your duty.

hester.  [_running forwards and embracing_ mrs. arbuthnot.]  no, no; you
shall not.  that would be real dishonour, the first you have ever known.
that would be real disgrace: the first to touch you.  leave him and come
with me.  there are other countries than england . . . oh! other
countries over sea, better, wiser, and less unjust lands.  the world is
very wide and very big.

mrs. arbuthnot.  no, not for me.  for me the world is shrivelled to a
palm’s breadth, and where i walk there are thorns.

hester.  it shall not be so.  we shall somewhere find green valleys and
fresh waters, and if we weep, well, we shall weep together.  have we not
both loved him?

gerald.  hester!

hester.  [_waving him back_.]  don’t, don’t!  you cannot love me at all,
unless you love her also.  you cannot honour me, unless she’s holier to
you.  in her all womanhood is martyred.  not she alone, but all of us are
stricken in her house.

gerald.  hester, hester, what shall i do?

hester.  do you respect the man who is your father?

gerald.  respect him?  i despise him!  he is infamous.

hester.  i thank you for saving me from him last night.

gerald.  ah, that is nothing.  i would die to save you.  but you don’t
tell me what to do now!

hester.  have i not thanked you for saving _me_?

gerald.  but what should i do?

hester.  ask your own heart, not mine.  i never had a mother to save, or
shame.

mrs. arbuthnot.  he is hard—he is hard.  let me go away.

gerald.  [_rushes over and kneels down bedside his mother_.]  mother,
forgive me: i have been to blame.

mrs. arbuthnot.  don’t kiss my hands: they are cold.  my heart is cold:
something has broken it.

hester.  ah, don’t say that.  hearts live by being wounded.  pleasure may
turn a heart to stone, riches may make it callous, but sorrow—oh, sorrow
cannot break it.  besides, what sorrows have you now?  why, at this
moment you are more dear to him than ever, _dear_ though you have _been_,
and oh! how dear you _have_ been always.  ah! be kind to him.

gerald.  you are my mother and my father all in one.  i need no second
parent.  it was for you i spoke, for you alone.  oh, say something,
mother.  have i but found one love to lose another?  don’t tell me that.
o mother, you are cruel.  [_gets up and flings himself sobbing on a
sofa_.]

mrs. arbuthnot.  [_to_ hester.]  but has he found indeed another love?

hester.  you know i have loved him always.

mrs. arbuthnot.  but we are very poor.

hester.  who, being loved, is poor?  oh, no one.  i hate my riches.  they
are a burden.  let him share it with me.

mrs. arbuthnot.  but we are disgraced.  we rank among the outcasts gerald
is nameless.  the sins of the parents should be visited on the children.
it is god’s law.

hester.  i was wrong.  god’s law is only love.

mrs. arbuthnot.  [_rises_, _and taking_ hester _by the hand_, _goes
slowly over to where_ gerald _is lying on the sofa with his head buried
in his hands_.  _she touches him and he looks up_.]  gerald, i cannot
give you a father, but i have brought you a wife.

gerald.  mother, i am not worthy either of her or you.

mrs. arbuthnot.  so she comes first, you are worthy.  and when you are
away, gerald . . . with . . . her—oh, think of me sometimes.  don’t
forget me.  and when you pray, pray for me.  we should pray when we are
happiest, and you will be happy, gerald.

hester.  oh, you don’t think of leaving us?

gerald.  mother, you won’t leave us?

mrs. arbuthnot.  i might bring shame upon you!

gerald.  mother!

mrs. arbuthnot.  for a little then: and if you let me, near you always.

hester.  [_to_ mrs. arbuthnot.]  come out with us to the garden.

mrs. arbuthnot.  later on, later on.  [_exeunt_ hester _and_ gerald.
mrs. arbuthnot _goes towards door_ l.c.   _stops at looking-glass over
mantelpiece and looks into it_.  _enter_ alice r.c.]

alice.  a gentleman to see you, ma’am.

mrs. arbuthnot.  say i am not at home.  show me the card.  [_takes card
from salver and looks at it_.]  say i will not see him.

[lord illingworth _enters_.  mrs. arbuthnot _sees him in the glass and
starts_, _but does not turn round_.  _exit_ alice.]  what can you have to
say to me to-day, george harford?  you can have nothing to say to me.
you must leave this house.

lord illingworth.  rachel, gerald knows everything about you and me now,
so some arrangement must be come to that will suit us all three.  i
assure you, he will find in me the most charming and generous of fathers.

mrs. arbuthnot.  my son may come in at any moment.  i saved you last
night.  i may not be able to save you again.  my son feels my dishonour
strongly, terribly strongly.  i beg you to go.

lord illingworth.  [_sitting down_.]  last night was excessively
unfortunate.  that silly puritan girl making a scene merely because i
wanted to kiss her.  what harm is there in a kiss?

mrs. arbuthnot.  [_turning round_.]  a kiss may ruin a human life, george
harford.  _i_ know that.  _i_ know that too well.

lord illingworth.  we won’t discuss that at present.  what is of
importance to-day, as yesterday, is still our son.  i am extremely fond
of him, as you know, and odd though it may seem to you, i admired his
conduct last night immensely.  he took up the cudgels for that pretty
prude with wonderful promptitude.  he is just what i should have liked a
son of mine to be.  except that no son of mine should ever take the side
of the puritans: that is always an error.  now, what i propose is this.

mrs. arbuthnot.  lord illingworth, no proposition of yours interests me.

lord illingworth.  according to our ridiculous english laws, i can’t
legitimise gerald.  but i can leave him my property.  illingworth is
entailed, of course, but it is a tedious barrack of a place.  he can have
ashby, which is much prettier, harborough, which has the best shooting in
the north of england, and the house in st. james square.  what more can a
gentleman require in this world?

mrs. arbuthnot.  nothing more, i am quite sure.

lord illingworth.  as for a title, a title is really rather a nuisance in
these democratic days.  as george harford i had everything i wanted.  now
i have merely everything that other people want, which isn’t nearly so
pleasant.  well, my proposal is this.

mrs. arbuthnot.  i told you i was not interested, and i beg you to go.

lord illingworth.  the boy is to be with you for six months in the year,
and with me for the other six.  that is perfectly fair, is it not?  you
can have whatever allowance you like, and live where you choose.  as for
your past, no one knows anything about it except myself and gerald.
there is the puritan, of course, the puritan in white muslin, but she
doesn’t count.  she couldn’t tell the story without explaining that she
objected to being kissed, could she?  and all the women would think her a
fool and the men think her a bore.  and you need not be afraid that
gerald won’t be my heir.  i needn’t tell you i have not the slightest
intention of marrying.

mrs. arbuthnot.  you come too late.  my son has no need of you.  you are
not necessary.

lord illingworth.  what do you mean, rachel?

mrs. arbuthnot.  that you are not necessary to gerald’s career.  he does
not require you.

lord illingworth.  i do not understand you.

mrs. arbuthnot.  look into the garden.  [lord illingworth _rises and goes
towards window_.]  you had better not let them see you: you bring
unpleasant memories.  [lord illingworth _looks out and starts_.]  she
loves him.  they love each other.  we are safe from you, and we are going
away.

lord illingworth.  where?

mrs. arbuthnot.  we will not tell you, and if you find us we will not
know you.  you seem surprised.  what welcome would you get from the girl
whose lips you tried to soil, from the boy whose life you have shamed,
from the mother whose dishonour comes from you?

lord illingworth.  you have grown hard, rachel.

mrs. arbuthnot.  i was too weak once.  it is well for me that i have
changed.

lord illingworth.  i was very young at the time.  we men know life too
early.

mrs. arbuthnot.  and we women know life too late.  that is the difference
between men and women.  [_a pause_.]

lord illingworth.  rachel, i want my son.  my money may be of no use to
him now.  i may be of no use to him, but i want my son.  bring us
together, rachel.  you can do it if you choose.  [_sees letter on
table_.]

mrs. arbuthnot.  there is no room in my boy’s life for you.  he is not
interested in _you_.

lord illingworth.  then why does he write to me?

mrs. arbuthnot.  what do you mean?

lord illingworth.  what letter is this?  [_takes up letter_.]

mrs. arbuthnot.  that—is nothing.  give it to me.

lord illingworth.  it is addressed to _me_.

mrs. arbuthnot.  you are not to open it.  i forbid you to open it.

lord illingworth.  and in gerald’s handwriting.

mrs. arbuthnot.  it was not to have been sent.  it is a letter he wrote
to you this morning, before he saw me.  but he is sorry now he wrote it,
very sorry.  you are not to open it.  give it to me.

lord illingworth.  it belongs to me.  [_opens it_, _sits down and reads
it slowly_. mrs. arbuthnot _watches him all the time_.]  you have read
this letter, i suppose, rachel?

mrs. arbuthnot.  no.

lord illingworth.  you know what is in it?

mrs. arbuthnot.  yes!

lord illingworth.  i don’t admit for a moment that the boy is right in
what he says.  i don’t admit that it is any duty of mine to marry you.  i
deny it entirely.  but to get my son back i am ready—yes, i am ready to
marry you, rachel—and to treat you always with the deference and respect
due to my wife.  i will marry you as soon as you choose.  i give you my
word of honour.

mrs. arbuthnot.  you made that promise to me once before and broke it.

lord illingworth.  i will keep it now.  and that will show you that i
love my son, at least as much as you love him.  for when i marry you,
rachel, there are some ambitions i shall have to surrender.  high
ambitions, too, if any ambition is high.

mrs. arbuthnot.  i decline to marry you, lord illingworth.

lord illingworth.  are you serious?

mrs. arbuthnot.  yes.

lord illingworth.  do tell me your reasons.  they would interest me
enormously.

mrs. arbuthnot.  i have already explained them to my son.

lord illingworth.  i suppose they were intensely sentimental, weren’t
they?  you women live by your emotions and for them.  you have no
philosophy of life.

mrs. arbuthnot.  you are right.  we women live by our emotions and for
them.  by our passions, and for them, if you will.  i have two passions,
lord illingworth: my love of him, my hate of you.  you cannot kill those.
they feed each other.

lord illingworth.  what sort of love is that which needs to have hate as
its brother?

mrs. arbuthnot.  it is the sort of love i have for gerald.  do you think
that terrible?  well it is terrible.  all love is terrible.  all love is
a tragedy.  i loved you once, lord illingworth.  oh, what a tragedy for a
woman to have loved you!

lord illingworth.  so you really refuse to marry me?

mrs. arbuthnot.  yes.

lord illingworth.  because you hate me?

mrs. arbuthnot.  yes.

lord illingworth.  and does my son hate me as you do?

mrs. arbuthnot.  no.

lord illingworth.  i am glad of that, rachel.

mrs. arbuthnot.  he merely despises you.

lord illingworth.  what a pity!  what a pity for him, i mean.

mrs. arbuthnot.  don’t be deceived, george.  children begin by loving
their parents.  after a time they judge them.  rarely if ever do they
forgive them.

lord illingworth.  [_reads letter over again_, _very slowly_.]  may i ask
by what arguments you made the boy who wrote this letter, this beautiful,
passionate letter, believe that you should not marry his father, the
father of your own child?

mrs. arbuthnot.  it was not i who made him see it.  it was another.

lord illingworth.  what _fin-de-siècle_ person?

mrs. arbuthnot.  the puritan, lord illingworth.  [_a pause_.]

lord illingworth.  [_winces_, _then rises slowly and goes over to table
where his hat and gloves are_.  mrs. arbuthnot _is standing close to the
table_.  _he picks up one of the gloves, and begins pulling it on_.]
there is not much then for me to do here, rachel?

mrs. arbuthnot.  nothing.

lord illingworth.  it is good-bye, is it?

mrs. arbuthnot.  for ever, i hope, this time, lord illingworth.

lord illingworth.  how curious!  at this moment you look exactly as you
looked the night you left me twenty years ago.  you have just the same
expression in your mouth.  upon my word, rachel, no woman ever loved me
as you did.  why, you gave yourself to me like a flower, to do anything i
liked with.  you were the prettiest of playthings, the most fascinating
of small romances . . . [_pulls out watch_.]  quarter to two!  must be
strolling back to hunstanton.  don’t suppose i shall see you there again.
i’m sorry, i am, really.  it’s been an amusing experience to have met
amongst people of one’s own rank, and treated quite seriously too, one’s
mistress, and one’s—

[mrs. arbuthnot _snatches up glove and strikes_ lord illingworth _across
the face with it_.  lord illingworth _starts_.  _he is dazed by the
insult of his punishment_.  _then he controls himself_, _and goes to
window and looks out at his son_.  _sighs and leaves the room_.]

mrs. arbuthnot.  [_falls sobbing on the sofa_.]  he would have said it.
he would have said it.

[_enter_ gerald _and_ hester _from the garden_.]

gerald.  well, dear mother.  you never came out after all.  so we have
come in to fetch you.  mother, you have not been crying?  [_kneels down
beside her_.]

mrs. arbuthnot.  my boy!  my boy!  my boy!  [_running her fingers through
his hair_.]

hester.  [_coming over_.]  but you have two children now.  you’ll let me
be your daughter?

mrs. arbuthnot.  [_looking up_.]  would you choose me for a mother?

hester.  you of all women i have ever known.

[_they move towards the door leading into garden with their arms round
each other’s waists_.  gerald _goes to table_ l.c. _for his hat_.  _on
turning round he sees_ lord illingworth’s _glove lying on the floor_,
_and picks it up_.]

gerald.  hallo, mother, whose glove is this?  you have had a visitor.
who was it?

mrs. arbuthnot.  [_turning round_.]  oh! no one.  no one in particular.
a man of no importance.


<|EndOfText|>

first act


scene


_the octagon room at sir robert chiltern’s house in grosvenor square_.

[_the room is brilliantly lighted and full of guests_.  _at the top of
the staircase stands_ lady chiltern, _a woman of grave greek beauty_,
_about twenty-seven years of age_.  _she receives the guests as they come
up_.  _over the well of the staircase hangs a great chandelier with wax
lights_, _which illumine a large eighteenth-century french
tapestry—representing the triumph of love_, _from a design by
boucher—that is stretched on the staircase wall_.  _on the right is the
entrance to the music-room_.  _the sound of a string quartette is faintly
heard_.  _the entrance on the left leads to other reception-rooms_.  mrs.
marchmont _and_ lady basildon, _two very pretty women_, _are seated
together on a louis seize sofa_.  _they are types of exquisite
fragility_.  _their affectation of manner has a delicate charm_.
_watteau would have loved to paint them_.]

mrs. marchmont.  going on to the hartlocks’ to-night, margaret?

lady basildon.  i suppose so.  are you?

mrs. marchmont.  yes.  horribly tedious parties they give, don’t they?

lady basildon.  horribly tedious!  never know why i go.  never know why i
go anywhere.

mrs. marchmont.  i come here to be educated.

lady basildon.  ah! i hate being educated!

mrs. marchmont.  so do i.  it puts one almost on a level with the
commercial classes, doesn’t it?  but dear gertrude chiltern is always
telling me that i should have some serious purpose in life.  so i come
here to try to find one.

lady basildon.  [_looking round through her lorgnette_.]  i don’t see
anybody here to-night whom one could possibly call a serious purpose.
the man who took me in to dinner talked to me about his wife the whole
time.

mrs. marchmont.  how very trivial of him!

lady basildon.  terribly trivial!  what did your man talk about?

mrs. marchmont.  about myself.

lady basildon.  [_languidly_.]  and were you interested?

mrs. marchmont.  [_shaking her head_.]  not in the smallest degree.

lady basildon.  what martyrs we are, dear margaret!

mrs. marchmont.  [_rising_.]  and how well it becomes us, olivia!

[_they rise and go towards the music-room_.  _the_ vicomte de nanjac, _a
young attaché known for his neckties and his anglomania_, _approaches
with a low bow_, _and enters into conversation_.]

mason.  [_announcing guests from the top of the staircase_.]  mr. and
lady jane barford.  lord caversham.

[_enter_ lord caversham, _an old gentleman of seventy_, _wearing the
riband and star of the garter_.  _a fine whig type_.  _rather like a
portrait by lawrence_.]

lord caversham.  good evening, lady chiltern!  has my good-for-nothing
young son been here?

lady chiltern.  [_smiling_.]  i don’t think lord goring has arrived yet.

mabel chiltern.  [_coming up to_ lord caversham.]  why do you call lord
goring good-for-nothing?

[mabel chiltern _is a perfect example of the english type of prettiness_,
_the apple-blossom type_.  _she has all the fragrance and freedom of a
flower_.  _there is ripple after ripple of sunlight in her hair_, _and
the little mouth_, _with its parted lips_, _is expectant_, _like the
mouth of a child_.  _she has the fascinating tyranny of youth_, _and the
astonishing courage of innocence_.  _to sane people she is not
reminiscent of any work of art_.  _but she is really like a tanagra
statuette_, _and would be rather annoyed if she were told so_.]

lord caversham.  because he leads such an idle life.

mabel chiltern.  how can you say such a thing?  why, he rides in the row
at ten o’clock in the morning, goes to the opera three times a week,
changes his clothes at least five times a day, and dines out every night
of the season.  you don’t call that leading an idle life, do you?

lord caversham.  [_looking at her with a kindly twinkle in his eyes_.]
you are a very charming young lady!

mabel chiltern.  how sweet of you to say that, lord caversham!  do come
to us more often.  you know we are always at home on wednesdays, and you
look so well with your star!

lord caversham.  never go anywhere now.  sick of london society.
shouldn’t mind being introduced to my own tailor; he always votes on the
right side.  but object strongly to being sent down to dinner with my
wife’s milliner.  never could stand lady caversham’s bonnets.

mabel chiltern.  oh, i love london society!  i think it has immensely
improved.  it is entirely composed now of beautiful idiots and brilliant
lunatics.  just what society should be.

lord caversham.  hum!  which is goring?  beautiful idiot, or the other
thing?

mabel chiltern.  [_gravely_.]  i have been obliged for the present to put
lord goring into a class quite by himself.  but he is developing
charmingly!

lord caversham.  into what?

mabel chiltern.  [_with a little curtsey_.]  i hope to let you know very
soon, lord caversham!

mason.  [_announcing guests_.]  lady markby.  mrs. cheveley.

[_enter_ lady markby _and_ mrs. cheveley.  lady markby _is a pleasant_,
_kindly_, _popular woman_, _with gray hair à la marquise and good lace_.
mrs. cheveley, _who accompanies her_, _is tall and rather slight_.  _lips
very thin and highly-coloured_, _a line of scarlet on a pallid face_.
_venetian red hair_, _aquiline nose_, _and long throat_.  _rouge
accentuates the natural paleness of her complexion_.  _gray-green eyes
that move restlessly_.  _she is in heliotrope_, _with diamonds_.  _she
looks rather like an orchid_, _and makes great demands on one’s
curiosity_.  _in all her movements she is extremely graceful_.  _a work
of art_, _on the whole_, _but showing the influence of too many
schools_.]

lady markby.  good evening, dear gertrude!  so kind of you to let me
bring my friend, mrs. cheveley.  two such charming women should know each
other!

lady chiltern.  [_advances towards_ mrs. cheveley _with a sweet smile_.
_then suddenly stops_, _and bows rather distantly_.]  i think mrs.
cheveley and i have met before.  i did not know she had married a second
time.

lady markby.  [_genially_.]  ah, nowadays people marry as often as they
can, don’t they?  it is most fashionable.  [_to_ duchess of maryborough.]
dear duchess, and how is the duke?  brain still weak, i suppose?  well,
that is only to be expected, is it not?  his good father was just the
same.  there is nothing like race, is there?

mrs. cheveley.  [_playing with her fan_.]  but have we really met before,
lady chiltern?  i can’t remember where.  i have been out of england for
so long.

lady chiltern.  we were at school together, mrs. cheveley.

mrs. cheveley [_superciliously_.]  indeed?  i have forgotten all about my
schooldays.  i have a vague impression that they were detestable.

lady chiltern.  [_coldly_.]  i am not surprised!

mrs. cheveley.  [_in her sweetest manner_.]  do you know, i am quite
looking forward to meeting your clever husband, lady chiltern.  since he
has been at the foreign office, he has been so much talked of in vienna.
they actually succeed in spelling his name right in the newspapers.  that
in itself is fame, on the continent.

lady chiltern.  i hardly think there will be much in common between you
and my husband, mrs. cheveley!  [_moves away_.]

vicomte de nanjac.  ah! chère madame, queue surprise!  i have not seen
you since berlin!

mrs. cheveley.  not since berlin, vicomte.  five years ago!

vicomte de nanjac.  and you are younger and more beautiful than ever.
how do you manage it?

mrs. cheveley.  by making it a rule only to talk to perfectly charming
people like yourself.

vicomte de nanjac.  ah! you flatter me.  you butter me, as they say here.

mrs. cheveley.  do they say that here?  how dreadful of them!

vicomte de nanjac.  yes, they have a wonderful language.  it should be
more widely known.

[sir robert chiltern _enters_.  _a man of forty_, _but looking somewhat
younger_.  _clean-shaven_, _with finely-cut features_, _dark-haired and
dark-eyed_.  _a personality of mark_.  _not popular—few personalities
are_.  _but intensely admired by the few_, _and deeply respected by the
many_.  _the note of his manner is that of perfect distinction_, _with a
slight touch of pride_.  _one feels that he is conscious of the success
he has made in life_.  _a nervous temperament_, _with a tired look_.
_the firmly-chiselled mouth and chin contrast strikingly with the
romantic expression in the deep-set eyes_.  _the variance is suggestive
of an almost complete separation of passion and intellect_, _as though
thought and emotion were each isolated in its own sphere through some
violence of will-power_.  _there is nervousness in the nostrils_, _and in
the pale_, _thin_, _pointed hands_.  _it would be inaccurate to call him
picturesque_.  _picturesqueness cannot survive the house of commons_.
_but vandyck would have liked to have painted his head_.]

sir robert chiltern.  good evening, lady markby!  i hope you have brought
sir john with you?

lady markby.  oh! i have brought a much more charming person than sir
john.  sir john’s temper since he has taken seriously to politics has
become quite unbearable.  really, now that the house of commons is trying
to become useful, it does a great deal of harm.

sir robert chiltern.  i hope not, lady markby.  at any rate we do our
best to waste the public time, don’t we?  but who is this charming person
you have been kind enough to bring to us?

lady markby.  her name is mrs. cheveley!  one of the dorsetshire
cheveleys, i suppose.  but i really don’t know.  families are so mixed
nowadays.  indeed, as a rule, everybody turns out to be somebody else.

sir robert chiltern.  mrs. cheveley?  i seem to know the name.

lady markby.  she has just arrived from vienna.

sir robert chiltern.  ah! yes.  i think i know whom you mean.

lady markby.  oh! she goes everywhere there, and has such pleasant
scandals about all her friends.  i really must go to vienna next winter.
i hope there is a good chef at the embassy.

sir robert chiltern.  if there is not, the ambassador will certainly have
to be recalled.  pray point out mrs. cheveley to me.  i should like to
see her.

lady markby.  let me introduce you.  [_to_ mrs. cheveley.]  my dear, sir
robert chiltern is dying to know you!

sir robert chiltern.  [_bowing_.]  every one is dying to know the
brilliant mrs. cheveley.  our attachés at vienna write to us about
nothing else.

mrs. cheveley.  thank you, sir robert.  an acquaintance that begins with
a compliment is sure to develop into a real friendship.  it starts in the
right manner.  and i find that i know lady chiltern already.

sir robert chiltern.  really?

mrs. cheveley.  yes.  she has just reminded me that we were at school
together.  i remember it perfectly now.  she always got the good conduct
prize.  i have a distinct recollection of lady chiltern always getting
the good conduct prize!

sir robert chiltern.  [_smiling_.]  and what prizes did you get, mrs.
cheveley?

mrs. cheveley.  my prizes came a little later on in life.  i don’t think
any of them were for good conduct.  i forget!

sir robert chiltern.  i am sure they were for something charming!

mrs. cheveley.  i don’t know that women are always rewarded for being
charming.  i think they are usually punished for it!  certainly, more
women grow old nowadays through the faithfulness of their admirers than
through anything else!  at least that is the only way i can account for
the terribly haggard look of most of your pretty women in london!

sir robert chiltern.  what an appalling philosophy that sounds!  to
attempt to classify you, mrs. cheveley, would be an impertinence.  but
may i ask, at heart, are you an optimist or a pessimist?  those seem to
be the only two fashionable religions left to us nowadays.

mrs. cheveley.  oh, i’m neither.  optimism begins in a broad grin, and
pessimism ends with blue spectacles.  besides, they are both of them
merely poses.

sir robert chiltern.  you prefer to be natural?

mrs. cheveley.  sometimes.  but it is such a very difficult pose to keep
up.

sir robert chiltern.  what would those modern psychological novelists, of
whom we hear so much, say to such a theory as that?

mrs. cheveley.  ah! the strength of women comes from the fact that
psychology cannot explain us.  men can be analysed, women . . . merely
adored.

sir robert chiltern.  you think science cannot grapple with the problem
of women?

mrs. cheveley.  science can never grapple with the irrational.  that is
why it has no future before it, in this world.

sir robert chiltern.  and women represent the irrational.

mrs. cheveley.  well-dressed women do.

sir robert chiltern.  [_with a polite bow_.]  i fear i could hardly agree
with you there.  but do sit down.  and now tell me, what makes you leave
your brilliant vienna for our gloomy london—or perhaps the question is
indiscreet?

mrs. cheveley.  questions are never indiscreet.  answers sometimes are.

sir robert chiltern.  well, at any rate, may i know if it is politics or
pleasure?

mrs. cheveley.  politics are my only pleasure.  you see nowadays it is
not fashionable to flirt till one is forty, or to be romantic till one is
forty-five, so we poor women who are under thirty, or say we are, have
nothing open to us but politics or philanthropy.  and philanthropy seems
to me to have become simply the refuge of people who wish to annoy their
fellow-creatures.  i prefer politics.  i think they are more . . .
becoming!

sir robert chiltern.  a political life is a noble career!

mrs. cheveley.  sometimes.  and sometimes it is a clever game, sir
robert.  and sometimes it is a great nuisance.

sir robert chiltern.  which do you find it?

mrs. cheveley.  i?  a combination of all three.  [_drops her fan_.]

sir robert chiltern.  [_picks up fan_.]  allow me!

mrs. cheveley.  thanks.

sir robert chiltern.  but you have not told me yet what makes you honour
london so suddenly.  our season is almost over.

mrs. cheveley.  oh! i don’t care about the london season!  it is too
matrimonial.  people are either hunting for husbands, or hiding from
them.  i wanted to meet you.  it is quite true.  you know what a woman’s
curiosity is.  almost as great as a man’s!  i wanted immensely to meet
you, and . . . to ask you to do something for me.

sir robert chiltern.  i hope it is not a little thing, mrs. cheveley.  i
find that little things are so very difficult to do.

mrs. cheveley.  [_after a moment’s reflection_.]  no, i don’t think it is
quite a little thing.

sir robert chiltern.  i am so glad.  do tell me what it is.

mrs. cheveley.  later on.  [_rises_.]  and now may i walk through your
beautiful house?  i hear your pictures are charming.  poor baron
arnheim—you remember the baron?—used to tell me you had some wonderful
corots.

sir robert chiltern.  [_with an almost imperceptible start_.]  did you
know baron arnheim well?

mrs. cheveley.  [_smiling_.]  intimately.  did you?

sir robert chiltern.  at one time.

mrs. cheveley.  wonderful man, wasn’t he?

sir robert chiltern.  [_after a pause_.]  he was very remarkable, in many
ways.

mrs. cheveley.  i often think it such a pity he never wrote his memoirs.
they would have been most interesting.

sir robert chiltern.  yes: he knew men and cities well, like the old
greek.

mrs. cheveley.  without the dreadful disadvantage of having a penelope
waiting at home for him.

mason.  lord goring.

[_enter_ lord goring.  _thirty-four_, _but always says he is younger_.
_a well-bred_, _expressionless face_.  _he is clever_, _but would not
like to be thought so_.  _a flawless dandy_, _he would be annoyed if he
were considered romantic_.  _he plays with life_, _and is on perfectly
good terms with the world_.  _he is fond of being misunderstood_.  _it
gives him a post of vantage_.]

sir robert chiltern.  good evening, my dear arthur!  mrs. cheveley, allow
me to introduce to you lord goring, the idlest man in london.

mrs. cheveley.  i have met lord goring before.

lord goring.  [_bowing_.]  i did not think you would remember me, mrs.
cheveley.

mrs. cheveley.  my memory is under admirable control.  and are you still
a bachelor?

lord goring.  i . . . believe so.

mrs. cheveley.  how very romantic!

lord goring.  oh! i am not at all romantic.  i am not old enough.  i
leave romance to my seniors.

sir robert chiltern.  lord goring is the result of boodle’s club, mrs.
cheveley.

mrs. cheveley.  he reflects every credit on the institution.

lord goring.  may i ask are you staying in london long?

mrs. cheveley.  that depends partly on the weather, partly on the
cooking, and partly on sir robert.

sir robert chiltern.  you are not going to plunge us into a european war,
i hope?

mrs. cheveley.  there is no danger, at present!

[_she nods to_ lord goring, _with a look of amusement in her eyes_, _and
goes out with_ sir robert chiltern.  lord goring _saunters over to_ mabel
chiltern.]

mabel chiltern.  you are very late!

lord goring.  have you missed me?

mabel chiltern.  awfully!

lord goring.  then i am sorry i did not stay away longer.  i like being
missed.

mabel chiltern.  how very selfish of you!

lord goring.  i am very selfish.

mabel chiltern.  you are always telling me of your bad qualities, lord
goring.

lord goring.  i have only told you half of them as yet, miss mabel!

mabel chiltern.  are the others very bad?

lord goring.  quite dreadful!  when i think of them at night i go to
sleep at once.

mabel chiltern.  well, i delight in your bad qualities.  i wouldn’t have
you part with one of them.

lord goring.  how very nice of you!  but then you are always nice.  by
the way, i want to ask you a question, miss mabel.  who brought mrs.
cheveley here?  that woman in heliotrope, who has just gone out of the
room with your brother?

mabel chiltern.  oh, i think lady markby brought her.  why do you ask?

lord goring.  i haven’t seen her for years, that is all.

mabel chiltern.  what an absurd reason!

lord goring.  all reasons are absurd.

mabel chiltern.  what sort of a woman is she?

lord goring.  oh! a genius in the daytime and a beauty at night!

mabel chiltern.  i dislike her already.

lord goring.  that shows your admirable good taste.

vicomte de nanjac.  [_approaching_.]  ah, the english young lady is the
dragon of good taste, is she not?  quite the dragon of good taste.

lord goring.  so the newspapers are always telling us.

vicomte de nanjac.  i read all your english newspapers.  i find them so
amusing.

lord goring.  then, my dear nanjac, you must certainly read between the
lines.

vicomte de nanjac.  i should like to, but my professor objects.  [_to_
mabel chiltern.]  may i have the pleasure of escorting you to the
music-room, mademoiselle?

mabel chiltern.  [_looking very disappointed_.]  delighted, vicomte,
quite delighted!  [_turning to_ lord goring.]  aren’t you coming to the
music-room?

lord goring.  not if there is any music going on, miss mabel.

mabel chiltern.  [_severely_.]  the music is in german.  you would not
understand it.

[_goes out with the_ vicomte de nanjac.  lord caversham _comes up to his
son_.]

lord caversham.  well, sir! what are you doing here?  wasting your life
as usual!  you should be in bed, sir.  you keep too late hours!  i heard
of you the other night at lady rufford’s dancing till four o’clock in the
morning!

lord goring.  only a quarter to four, father.

lord caversham.  can’t make out how you stand london society.  the thing
has gone to the dogs, a lot of damned nobodies talking about nothing.

lord goring.  i love talking about nothing, father.  it is the only thing
i know anything about.

lord caversham.  you seem to me to be living entirely for pleasure.

lord goring.  what else is there to live for, father?  nothing ages like
happiness.

lord caversham.  you are heartless, sir, very heartless!

lord goring.  i hope not, father.  good evening, lady basildon!

lady basildon.  [_arching two pretty eyebrows_.]  are you here?  i had no
idea you ever came to political parties!

lord goring.  i adore political parties.  they are the only place left to
us where people don’t talk politics.

lady basildon.  i delight in talking politics.  i talk them all day long.
but i can’t bear listening to them.  i don’t know how the unfortunate men
in the house stand these long debates.

lord goring.  by never listening.

lady basildon.  really?

lord goring.  [_in his most serious manner_.]  of course.  you see, it is
a very dangerous thing to listen.  if one listens one may be convinced;
and a man who allows himself to be convinced by an argument is a
thoroughly unreasonable person.

lady basildon.  ah! that accounts for so much in men that i have never
understood, and so much in women that their husbands never appreciate in
them!

mrs. marchmont.  [_with a sigh_.]  our husbands never appreciate anything
in us.  we have to go to others for that!

lady basildon.  [_emphatically_.]  yes, always to others, have we not?

lord goring.  [_smiling_.]  and those are the views of the two ladies who
are known to have the most admirable husbands in london.

mrs. marchmont.  that is exactly what we can’t stand.  my reginald is
quite hopelessly faultless.  he is really unendurably so, at times!
there is not the smallest element of excitement in knowing him.

lord goring.  how terrible!  really, the thing should be more widely
known!

lady basildon.  basildon is quite as bad; he is as domestic as if he was
a bachelor.

mrs. marchmont.  [_pressing_ lady basildon’s _hand_.]  my poor olivia!
we have married perfect husbands, and we are well punished for it.

lord goring.  i should have thought it was the husbands who were
punished.

mrs. marchmont.  [_drawing herself up_.]  oh, dear no!  they are as happy
as possible!  and as for trusting us, it is tragic how much they trust
us.

lady basildon.  perfectly tragic!

lord goring.  or comic, lady basildon?

lady basildon.  certainly not comic, lord goring.  how unkind of you to
suggest such a thing!

mrs. marchmont.  i am afraid lord goring is in the camp of the enemy, as
usual.  i saw him talking to that mrs. cheveley when he came in.

lord goring.  handsome woman, mrs. cheveley!

lady basildon.  [_stiffly_.]  please don’t praise other women in our
presence.  you might wait for us to do that!

lord goring.  i did wait.

mrs. marchmont.  well, we are not going to praise her.  i hear she went
to the opera on monday night, and told tommy rufford at supper that, as
far as she could see, london society was entirely made up of dowdies and
dandies.

lord goring.  she is quite right, too.  the men are all dowdies and the
women are all dandies, aren’t they?

mrs. marchmont.  [_after a pause_.]  oh! do you really think that is what
mrs. cheveley meant?

lord goring.  of course.  and a very sensible remark for mrs. cheveley to
make, too.

[_enter_ mabel chiltern.  _she joins the group_.]

mabel chiltern.  why are you talking about mrs. cheveley?  everybody is
talking about mrs. cheveley!  lord goring says—what did you say, lord
goring, about mrs. cheveley?  oh! i remember, that she was a genius in
the daytime and a beauty at night.

lady basildon.  what a horrid combination!  so very unnatural!

mrs. marchmont.  [_in her most dreamy manner_.]  i like looking at
geniuses, and listening to beautiful people.

lord goring.  ah! that is morbid of you, mrs. marchmont!

mrs. marchmont.  [_brightening to a look of real pleasure_.]  i am so
glad to hear you say that.  marchmont and i have been married for seven
years, and he has never once told me that i was morbid.  men are so
painfully unobservant!

lady basildon.  [_turning to her_.]  i have always said, dear margaret,
that you were the most morbid person in london.

mrs. marchmont.  ah! but you are always sympathetic, olivia!

mabel chiltern.  is it morbid to have a desire for food?  i have a great
desire for food.  lord goring, will you give me some supper?

lord goring.  with pleasure, miss mabel.  [_moves away with her_.]

mabel chiltern.  how horrid you have been!  you have never talked to me
the whole evening!

lord goring.  how could i?  you went away with the child-diplomatist.

mabel chiltern.  you might have followed us.  pursuit would have been
only polite.  i don’t think i like you at all this evening!

lord goring.  i like you immensely.

mabel chiltern.  well, i wish you’d show it in a more marked way!  [_they
go downstairs_.]

mrs. marchmont.  olivia, i have a curious feeling of absolute faintness.
i think i should like some supper very much.  i know i should like some
supper.

lady basildon.  i am positively dying for supper, margaret!

mrs. marchmont.  men are so horribly selfish, they never think of these
things.

lady basildon.  men are grossly material, grossly material!

[_the_ vicomte de nanjac _enters from the music-room with some other
guests_.  _after having carefully examined all the people present_, _he
approaches_ lady basildon.]

vicomte de nanjac.  may i have the honour of taking you down to supper,
comtesse?

lady basildon.  [_coldly_.]  i never take supper, thank you, vicomte.
[_the_ vicomte _is about to retire_.  lady basildon, _seeing this_,
_rises at once and takes his arm_.]  but i will come down with you with
pleasure.

vicomte de nanjac.  i am so fond of eating!  i am very english in all my
tastes.

lady basildon.  you look quite english, vicomte, quite english.

[_they pass out_.  mr. montford, _a perfectly groomed young dandy_,
_approaches_ mrs. marchmont.]

mr. montford.  like some supper, mrs. marchmont?

mrs. marchmont.  [_languidly_.]  thank you, mr. montford, i never touch
supper.  [_rises hastily and takes his arm_.]  but i will sit beside you,
and watch you.

mr. montford.  i don’t know that i like being watched when i am eating!

mrs. marchmont.  then i will watch some one else.

mr. montford.  i don’t know that i should like that either.

mrs. marchmont.  [_severely_.]  pray, mr. montford, do not make these
painful scenes of jealousy in public!

[_they go downstairs with the other guests_, _passing_ sir robert
chiltern _and_ mrs. cheveley, _who now enter_.]

sir robert chiltern.  and are you going to any of our country houses
before you leave england, mrs. cheveley?

mrs. cheveley.  oh, no!  i can’t stand your english house-parties.  in
england people actually try to be brilliant at breakfast.  that is so
dreadful of them!  only dull people are brilliant at breakfast.  and then
the family skeleton is always reading family prayers.  my stay in england
really depends on you, sir robert.  [_sits down on the sofa_.]

sir robert chiltern.  [_taking a seat beside her_.]  seriously?

mrs. cheveley.  quite seriously.  i want to talk to you about a great
political and financial scheme, about this argentine canal company, in
fact.

sir robert chiltern.  what a tedious, practical subject for you to talk
about, mrs. cheveley!

mrs. cheveley.  oh, i like tedious, practical subjects.  what i don’t
like are tedious, practical people.  there is a wide difference.
besides, you are interested, i know, in international canal schemes.  you
were lord radley’s secretary, weren’t you, when the government bought the
suez canal shares?

sir robert chiltern.  yes.  but the suez canal was a very great and
splendid undertaking.  it gave us our direct route to india.  it had
imperial value.  it was necessary that we should have control.  this
argentine scheme is a commonplace stock exchange swindle.

mrs. cheveley.  a speculation, sir robert!  a brilliant, daring
speculation.

sir robert chiltern.  believe me, mrs. cheveley, it is a swindle.  let us
call things by their proper names.  it makes matters simpler.  we have
all the information about it at the foreign office.  in fact, i sent out
a special commission to inquire into the matter privately, and they
report that the works are hardly begun, and as for the money already
subscribed, no one seems to know what has become of it.  the whole thing
is a second panama, and with not a quarter of the chance of success that
miserable affair ever had.  i hope you have not invested in it.  i am
sure you are far too clever to have done that.

mrs. cheveley.  i have invested very largely in it.

sir robert chiltern.  who could have advised you to do such a foolish
thing?

mrs. cheveley.  your old friend—and mine.

sir robert chiltern.  who?

mrs. cheveley.  baron arnheim.

sir robert chiltern.  [_frowning_.]  ah! yes.  i remember hearing, at the
time of his death, that he had been mixed up in the whole affair.

mrs. cheveley.  it was his last romance.  his last but one, to do him
justice.

sir robert chiltern.  [_rising_.]  but you have not seen my corots yet.
they are in the music-room.  corots seem to go with music, don’t they?
may i show them to you?

mrs. cheveley.  [_shaking her head_.]  i am not in a mood to-night for
silver twilights, or rose-pink dawns.  i want to talk business.
[_motions to him with her fan to sit down again beside her_.]

sir robert chiltern.  i fear i have no advice to give you, mrs. cheveley,
except to interest yourself in something less dangerous.  the success of
the canal depends, of course, on the attitude of england, and i am going
to lay the report of the commissioners before the house to-morrow night.

mrs. cheveley.  that you must not do.  in your own interests, sir robert,
to say nothing of mine, you must not do that.

sir robert chiltern.  [_looking at her in wonder_.]  in my own interests?
my dear mrs. cheveley, what do you mean?  [_sits down beside her_.]

mrs. cheveley.  sir robert, i will be quite frank with you.  i want you
to withdraw the report that you had intended to lay before the house, on
the ground that you have reasons to believe that the commissioners have
been prejudiced or misinformed, or something.  then i want you to say a
few words to the effect that the government is going to reconsider the
question, and that you have reason to believe that the canal, if
completed, will be of great international value.  you know the sort of
things ministers say in cases of this kind.  a few ordinary platitudes
will do.  in modern life nothing produces such an effect as a good
platitude.  it makes the whole world kin.  will you do that for me?

sir robert chiltern.  mrs. cheveley, you cannot be serious in making me
such a proposition!

mrs. cheveley.  i am quite serious.

sir robert chiltern.  [_coldly_.]  pray allow me to believe that you are
not.

mrs. cheveley.  [_speaking with great deliberation and emphasis_.]  ah!
but i am.  and if you do what i ask you, i . . . will pay you very
handsomely!

sir robert chiltern.  pay me!

mrs. cheveley.  yes.

sir robert chiltern.  i am afraid i don’t quite understand what you mean.

mrs. cheveley.  [_leaning back on the sofa and looking at him_.]  how
very disappointing!  and i have come all the way from vienna in order
that you should thoroughly understand me.

sir robert chiltern.  i fear i don’t.

mrs. cheveley.  [_in her most nonchalant manner_.]  my dear sir robert,
you are a man of the world, and you have your price, i suppose.
everybody has nowadays.  the drawback is that most people are so
dreadfully expensive.  i know i am.  i hope you will be more reasonable
in your terms.

sir robert chiltern.  [_rises indignantly_.]  if you will allow me, i
will call your carriage for you.  you have lived so long abroad, mrs.
cheveley, that you seem to be unable to realise that you are talking to
an english gentleman.

mrs. cheveley.  [_detains him by touching his arm with her fan_, _and
keeping it there while she is talking_.]  i realise that i am talking to
a man who laid the foundation of his fortune by selling to a stock
exchange speculator a cabinet secret.

sir robert chiltern.  [_biting his lip_.]  what do you mean?

mrs. cheveley.  [_rising and facing him_.]  i mean that i know the real
origin of your wealth and your career, and i have got your letter, too.

sir robert chiltern.  what letter?

mrs. cheveley.  [_contemptuously_.]  the letter you wrote to baron
arnheim, when you were lord radley’s secretary, telling the baron to buy
suez canal shares—a letter written three days before the government
announced its own purchase.

sir robert chiltern.  [_hoarsely_.]  it is not true.

mrs. cheveley.  you thought that letter had been destroyed.  how foolish
of you!  it is in my possession.

sir robert chiltern.  the affair to which you allude was no more than a
speculation.  the house of commons had not yet passed the bill; it might
have been rejected.

mrs. cheveley.  it was a swindle, sir robert.  let us call things by
their proper names.  it makes everything simpler.  and now i am going to
sell you that letter, and the price i ask for it is your public support
of the argentine scheme.  you made your own fortune out of one canal.
you must help me and my friends to make our fortunes out of another!

sir robert chiltern.  it is infamous, what you propose—infamous!

mrs. cheveley.  oh, no!  this is the game of life as we all have to play
it, sir robert, sooner or later!

sir robert chiltern.  i cannot do what you ask me.

mrs. cheveley.  you mean you cannot help doing it.  you know you are
standing on the edge of a precipice.  and it is not for you to make
terms.  it is for you to accept them.  supposing you refuse—

sir robert chiltern.  what then?

mrs. cheveley.  my dear sir robert, what then?  you are ruined, that is
all!  remember to what a point your puritanism in england has brought
you.  in old days nobody pretended to be a bit better than his
neighbours.  in fact, to be a bit better than one’s neighbour was
considered excessively vulgar and middle-class.  nowadays, with our
modern mania for morality, every one has to pose as a paragon of purity,
incorruptibility, and all the other seven deadly virtues—and what is the
result?  you all go over like ninepins—one after the other.  not a year
passes in england without somebody disappearing.  scandals used to lend
charm, or at least interest, to a man—now they crush him.  and yours is a
very nasty scandal. you couldn’t survive it.  if it were known that as a
young man, secretary to a great and important minister, you sold a
cabinet secret for a large sum of money, and that that was the origin of
your wealth and career, you would be hounded out of public life, you
would disappear completely.  and after all, sir robert, why should you
sacrifice your entire future rather than deal diplomatically with your
enemy?  for the moment i am your enemy.  i admit it!  and i am much
stronger than you are.  the big battalions are on my side.  you have a
splendid position, but it is your splendid position that makes you so
vulnerable.  you can’t defend it!  and i am in attack.  of course i have
not talked morality to you.  you must admit in fairness that i have
spared you that.  years ago you did a clever, unscrupulous thing; it
turned out a great success.  you owe to it your fortune and position.
and now you have got to pay for it.  sooner or later we have all to pay
for what we do.  you have to pay now.  before i leave you to-night, you
have got to promise me to suppress your report, and to speak in the house
in favour of this scheme.

sir robert chiltern.  what you ask is impossible.

mrs. cheveley.  you must make it possible.  you are going to make it
possible.  sir robert, you know what your english newspapers are like.
suppose that when i leave this house i drive down to some newspaper
office, and give them this scandal and the proofs of it!  think of their
loathsome joy, of the delight they would have in dragging you down, of
the mud and mire they would plunge you in.  think of the hypocrite with
his greasy smile penning his leading article, and arranging the foulness
of the public placard.

sir robert chiltern.  stop!  you want me to withdraw the report and to
make a short speech stating that i believe there are possibilities in the
scheme?

mrs. cheveley.  [_sitting down on the sofa_.]  those are my terms.

sir robert chiltern.  [_in a low voice_.]  i will give you any sum of
money you want.

mrs. cheveley.  even you are not rich enough, sir robert, to buy back
your past.  no man is.

sir robert chiltern.  i will not do what you ask me.  i will not.

mrs. cheveley.  you have to.  if you don’t . . . [_rises from the sofa_.]

sir robert chiltern.  [_bewildered and unnerved_.]  wait a moment!  what
did you propose?  you said that you would give me back my letter, didn’t
you?

mrs. cheveley.  yes.  that is agreed.  i will be in the ladies’ gallery
to-morrow night at half-past eleven.  if by that time—and you will have
had heaps of opportunity—you have made an announcement to the house in
the terms i wish, i shall hand you back your letter with the prettiest
thanks, and the best, or at any rate the most suitable, compliment i can
think of.  i intend to play quite fairly with you.  one should always
play fairly . . . when one has the winning cards.  the baron taught me
that . . . amongst other things.

sir robert chiltern.  you must let me have time to consider your
proposal.

mrs. cheveley.  no; you must settle now!

sir robert chiltern.  give me a week—three days!

mrs. cheveley.  impossible!  i have got to telegraph to vienna to-night.

sir robert chiltern.  my god! what brought you into my life?

mrs. cheveley.  circumstances.  [_moves towards the door_.]

sir robert chiltern.  don’t go.  i consent.  the report shall be
withdrawn.  i will arrange for a question to be put to me on the subject.

mrs. cheveley.  thank you.  i knew we should come to an amicable
agreement.  i understood your nature from the first.  i analysed you,
though you did not adore me.  and now you can get my carriage for me, sir
robert.  i see the people coming up from supper, and englishmen always
get romantic after a meal, and that bores me dreadfully.  [_exit_ sir
robert chiltern.]

[_enter guests_, lady chiltern, lady markby, lord caversham, lady
basildon, mrs. marchmont, vicomte de nanjac, mr. montford.]

lady markby.  well, dear mrs. cheveley, i hope you have enjoyed yourself.
sir robert is very entertaining, is he not?

mrs. cheveley.  most entertaining!  i have enjoyed my talk with him
immensely.

lady markby.  he has had a very interesting and brilliant career.  and he
has married a most admirable wife.  lady chiltern is a woman of the very
highest principles, i am glad to say.  i am a little too old now, myself,
to trouble about setting a good example, but i always admire people who
do.  and lady chiltern has a very ennobling effect on life, though her
dinner-parties are rather dull sometimes.  but one can’t have everything,
can one?  and now i must go, dear.  shall i call for you to-morrow?

mrs. cheveley.  thanks.

lady markby.  we might drive in the park at five.  everything looks so
fresh in the park now!

mrs. cheveley.  except the people!

lady markby.  perhaps the people are a little jaded.  i have often
observed that the season as it goes on produces a kind of softening of
the brain.  however, i think anything is better than high intellectual
pressure.  that is the most unbecoming thing there is.  it makes the
noses of the young girls so particularly large.  and there is nothing so
difficult to marry as a large nose; men don’t like them.  good-night,
dear!  [_to_ lady chiltern.]  good-night, gertrude!  [_goes out on_ lord
caversham’s _arm_.]

mrs. cheveley.  what a charming house you have, lady chiltern!  i have
spent a delightful evening.  it has been so interesting getting to know
your husband.

lady chiltern.  why did you wish to meet my husband, mrs. cheveley?

mrs. cheveley.  oh, i will tell you.  i wanted to interest him in this
argentine canal scheme, of which i dare say you have heard.  and i found
him most susceptible,—susceptible to reason, i mean.  a rare thing in a
man.  i converted him in ten minutes.  he is going to make a speech in
the house to-morrow night in favour of the idea.  we must go to the
ladies’ gallery and hear him!  it will be a great occasion!

lady chiltern.  there must be some mistake.  that scheme could never have
my husband’s support.

mrs. cheveley.  oh, i assure you it’s all settled.  i don’t regret my
tedious journey from vienna now.  it has been a great success.  but, of
course, for the next twenty-four hours the whole thing is a dead secret.

lady chiltern.  [_gently_.]  a secret?  between whom?

mrs. cheveley.  [_with a flash of amusement in her eyes_.]  between your
husband and myself.

sir robert chiltern.  [_entering_.]  your carriage is here, mrs.
cheveley!

mrs. cheveley.  thanks!  good evening, lady chiltern!  good-night, lord
goring!  i am at claridge’s.  don’t you think you might leave a card?

lord goring.  if you wish it, mrs. cheveley!

mrs. cheveley.  oh, don’t be so solemn about it, or i shall be obliged to
leave a card on you.  in england i suppose that would hardly be
considered en règle.  abroad, we are more civilised.  will you see me
down, sir robert?  now that we have both the same interests at heart we
shall be great friends, i hope!

[_sails out on_ sir robert chiltern’s _arm_.  lady chiltern _goes to the
top of the staircase and looks down at them as they descend_.  _her
expression is troubled_.  _after a little time she is joined by some of
the guests_, _and passes with them into another reception-room_.]

mabel chiltern.  what a horrid woman!

lord goring.  you should go to bed, miss mabel.

mabel chiltern.  lord goring!

lord goring.  my father told me to go to bed an hour ago.  i don’t see
why i shouldn’t give you the same advice.  i always pass on good advice.
it is the only thing to do with it.  it is never of any use to oneself.

mabel chiltern.  lord goring, you are always ordering me out of the room.
i think it most courageous of you.  especially as i am not going to bed
for hours.  [_goes over to the sofa_.]  you can come and sit down if you
like, and talk about anything in the world, except the royal academy,
mrs. cheveley, or novels in scotch dialect.  they are not improving
subjects.  [_catches sight of something that is lying on the sofa half
hidden by the cushion_.]  what is this?  some one has dropped a diamond
brooch!  quite beautiful, isn’t it?  [_shows it to him_.]  i wish it was
mine, but gertrude won’t let me wear anything but pearls, and i am
thoroughly sick of pearls.  they make one look so plain, so good and so
intellectual.  i wonder whom the brooch belongs to.

lord goring.  i wonder who dropped it.

mabel chiltern.  it is a beautiful brooch.

lord goring.  it is a handsome bracelet.

mabel chiltern.  it isn’t a bracelet.  it’s a brooch.

lord goring.  it can be used as a bracelet.  [_takes it from her_, _and_,
_pulling out a green letter-case_, _puts the ornament carefully in it_,
_and replaces the whole thing in his breast-pocket with the most perfect
sang froid_.]

mabel chiltern.  what are you doing?

lord goring.  miss mabel, i am going to make a rather strange request to
you.

mabel chiltern.  [_eagerly_.]  oh, pray do!  i have been waiting for it
all the evening.

lord goring.  [_is a little taken aback_, _but recovers himself_.]  don’t
mention to anybody that i have taken charge of this brooch.  should any
one write and claim it, let me know at once.

mabel chiltern.  that is a strange request.

lord goring.  well, you see i gave this brooch to somebody once, years
ago.

mabel chiltern.  you did?

lord goring.  yes.

[lady chiltern _enters alone_.  _the other guests have gone_.]

mabel chiltern.  then i shall certainly bid you good-night.  good-night,
gertrude!  [_exit_.]

lady chiltern.  good-night, dear!  [_to_ lord goring.]  you saw whom lady
markby brought here to-night?

lord goring.  yes.  it was an unpleasant surprise.  what did she come
here for?

lady chiltern.  apparently to try and lure robert to uphold some
fraudulent scheme in which she is interested.  the argentine canal, in
fact.

lord goring.  she has mistaken her man, hasn’t she?

lady chiltern.  she is incapable of understanding an upright nature like
my husband’s!

lord goring.  yes.  i should fancy she came to grief if she tried to get
robert into her toils.  it is extraordinary what astounding mistakes
clever women make.

lady chiltern.  i don’t call women of that kind clever.  i call them
stupid!

lord goring.  same thing often.  good-night, lady chiltern!

lady chiltern.  good-night!

[_enter_ sir robert chiltern.]

sir robert chiltern.  my dear arthur, you are not going?  do stop a
little!

lord goring.  afraid i can’t, thanks.  i have promised to look in at the
hartlocks’.  i believe they have got a mauve hungarian band that plays
mauve hungarian music.  see you soon.  good-bye!

[_exit_]

sir robert chiltern.  how beautiful you look to-night, gertrude!

lady chiltern.  robert, it is not true, is it?  you are not going to lend
your support to this argentine speculation?  you couldn’t!

sir robert chiltern.  [_starting_.]  who told you i intended to do so?

lady chiltern.  that woman who has just gone out, mrs. cheveley, as she
calls herself now.  she seemed to taunt me with it.  robert, i know this
woman.  you don’t.  we were at school together.  she was untruthful,
dishonest, an evil influence on every one whose trust or friendship she
could win.  i hated, i despised her.  she stole things, she was a thief.
she was sent away for being a thief.  why do you let her influence you?

sir robert chiltern.  gertrude, what you tell me may be true, but it
happened many years ago.  it is best forgotten!  mrs. cheveley may have
changed since then.  no one should be entirely judged by their past.

lady chiltern.  [_sadly_.]  one’s past is what one is.  it is the only
way by which people should be judged.

sir robert chiltern.  that is a hard saying, gertrude!

lady chiltern.  it is a true saying, robert.  and what did she mean by
boasting that she had got you to lend your support, your name, to a thing
i have heard you describe as the most dishonest and fraudulent scheme
there has ever been in political life?

sir robert chiltern.  [_biting his lip_.]  i was mistaken in the view i
took.  we all may make mistakes.

lady chiltern.  but you told me yesterday that you had received the
report from the commission, and that it entirely condemned the whole
thing.

sir robert chiltern.  [_walking up and down_.]  i have reasons now to
believe that the commission was prejudiced, or, at any rate, misinformed.
besides, gertrude, public and private life are different things.  they
have different laws, and move on different lines.

lady chiltern.  they should both represent man at his highest.  i see no
difference between them.

sir robert chiltern.  [_stopping_.]  in the present case, on a matter of
practical politics, i have changed my mind.  that is all.

lady chiltern.  all!

sir robert chiltern.  [_sternly_.]  yes!

lady chiltern.  robert!  oh! it is horrible that i should have to ask you
such a question—robert, are you telling me the whole truth?

sir robert chiltern.  why do you ask me such a question?

lady chiltern.  [_after a pause_.]  why do you not answer it?

sir robert chiltern.  [_sitting down_.]  gertrude, truth is a very
complex thing, and politics is a very complex business.  there are wheels
within wheels.  one may be under certain obligations to people that one
must pay.  sooner or later in political life one has to compromise.
every one does.

lady chiltern.  compromise?  robert, why do you talk so differently
to-night from the way i have always heard you talk?  why are you changed?

sir robert chiltern.  i am not changed.  but circumstances alter things.

lady chiltern.  circumstances should never alter principles!

sir robert chiltern.  but if i told you—

lady chiltern.  what?

sir robert chiltern.  that it was necessary, vitally necessary?

lady chiltern.  it can never be necessary to do what is not honourable.
or if it be necessary, then what is it that i have loved!  but it is not,
robert; tell me it is not.  why should it be?  what gain would you get?
money?  we have no need of that!  and money that comes from a tainted
source is a degradation.  power?  but power is nothing in itself.  it is
power to do good that is fine—that, and that only.  what is it, then?
robert, tell me why you are going to do this dishonourable thing!

sir robert chiltern.  gertrude, you have no right to use that word.  i
told you it was a question of rational compromise.  it is no more than
that.

lady chiltern.  robert, that is all very well for other men, for men who
treat life simply as a sordid speculation; but not for you, robert, not
for you.  you are different.  all your life you have stood apart from
others.  you have never let the world soil you.  to the world, as to
myself, you have been an ideal always.  oh! be that ideal still.  that
great inheritance throw not away—that tower of ivory do not destroy.
robert, men can love what is beneath them—things unworthy, stained,
dishonoured.  we women worship when we love; and when we lose our
worship, we lose everything.  oh! don’t kill my love for you, don’t kill
that!

sir robert chiltern.  gertrude!

lady chiltern.  i know that there are men with horrible secrets in their
lives—men who have done some shameful thing, and who in some critical
moment have to pay for it, by doing some other act of shame—oh! don’t
tell me you are such as they are!  robert, is there in your life any
secret dishonour or disgrace?  tell me, tell me at once, that—

sir robert chiltern.  that what?

lady chiltern.  [_speaking very slowly_.]  that our lives may drift
apart.

sir robert chiltern.  drift apart?

lady chiltern.  that they may be entirely separate.  it would be better
for us both.

sir robert chiltern.  gertrude, there is nothing in my past life that you
might not know.

lady chiltern.  i was sure of it, robert, i was sure of it.  but why did
you say those dreadful things, things so unlike your real self?  don’t
let us ever talk about the subject again.  you will write, won’t you, to
mrs. cheveley, and tell her that you cannot support this scandalous
scheme of hers?  if you have given her any promise you must take it back,
that is all!

sir robert chiltern.  must i write and tell her that?

lady chiltern.  surely, robert!  what else is there to do?

sir robert chiltern.  i might see her personally.  it would be better.

lady chiltern.  you must never see her again, robert.  she is not a woman
you should ever speak to.  she is not worthy to talk to a man like you.
no; you must write to her at once, now, this moment, and let your letter
show her that your decision is quite irrevocable!

sir robert chiltern.  write this moment!

lady chiltern.  yes.

sir robert chiltern.  but it is so late.  it is close on twelve.

lady chiltern.  that makes no matter.  she must know at once that she has
been mistaken in you—and that you are not a man to do anything base or
underhand or dishonourable.  write here, robert.  write that you decline
to support this scheme of hers, as you hold it to be a dishonest scheme.
yes—write the word dishonest.  she knows what that word means.  [sir
robert chiltern _sits down and writes a letter_.  _his wife takes it up
and reads it_.]  yes; that will do.  [_rings bell_.]  and now the
envelope.  [_he writes the envelope slowly_.  _enter_ mason.]  have this
letter sent at once to claridge’s hotel.  there is no answer.  [_exit_
mason.  lady chiltern _kneels down beside her husband_, _and puts her
arms around him_.]  robert, love gives one an instinct to things.  i feel
to-night that i have saved you from something that might have been a
danger to you, from something that might have made men honour you less
than they do.  i don’t think you realise sufficiently, robert, that you
have brought into the political life of our time a nobler atmosphere, a
finer attitude towards life, a freer air of purer aims and higher
ideals—i know it, and for that i love you, robert.

sir robert chiltern.  oh, love me always, gertrude, love me always!

lady chiltern.  i will love you always, because you will always be worthy
of love.  we needs must love the highest when we see it!  [_kisses him
and rises and goes out_.]

[sir robert chiltern _walks up and down for a moment_; _then sits down
and buries his face in his hands_.  _the servant enters and begins
pulling out the lights_.  sir robert chiltern _looks up_.]

sir robert chiltern.  put out the lights, mason, put out the lights!

[_the servant puts out the lights_.  _the room becomes almost dark_.
_the only light there is comes from the great chandelier that hangs over
the staircase and illumines the tapestry of the triumph of love_.]

                                 act drop




second act


scene


_morning-room at sir robert chiltern’s house_.

[lord goring, _dressed in the height of fashion_, _is lounging in an
armchair_.  sir robert chiltern _is standing in front of the fireplace_.
_he is evidently in a state of great mental excitement and distress_.
_as the scene progresses he paces nervously up and down the room_.]

lord goring.  my dear robert, it’s a very awkward business, very awkward
indeed.  you should have told your wife the whole thing.  secrets from
other people’s wives are a necessary luxury in modern life.  so, at
least, i am always told at the club by people who are bald enough to know
better.  but no man should have a secret from his own wife.  she
invariably finds it out.  women have a wonderful instinct about things.
they can discover everything except the obvious.

sir robert chiltern.  arthur, i couldn’t tell my wife.  when could i have
told her?  not last night.  it would have made a life-long separation
between us, and i would have lost the love of the one woman in the world
i worship, of the only woman who has ever stirred love within me.  last
night it would have been quite impossible.  she would have turned from me
in horror . . . in horror and in contempt.

lord goring.  is lady chiltern as perfect as all that?

sir robert chiltern.  yes; my wife is as perfect as all that.

lord goring.  [_taking off his left-hand glove_.]  what a pity!  i beg
your pardon, my dear fellow, i didn’t quite mean that.  but if what you
tell me is true, i should like to have a serious talk about life with
lady chiltern.

sir robert chiltern.  it would be quite useless.

lord goring.  may i try?

sir robert chiltern.  yes; but nothing could make her alter her views.

lord goring.  well, at the worst it would simply be a psychological
experiment.

sir robert chiltern.  all such experiments are terribly dangerous.

lord goring.  everything is dangerous, my dear fellow.  if it wasn’t so,
life wouldn’t be worth living. . . . well, i am bound to say that i think
you should have told her years ago.

sir robert chiltern.  when?  when we were engaged?  do you think she
would have married me if she had known that the origin of my fortune is
such as it is, the basis of my career such as it is, and that i had done
a thing that i suppose most men would call shameful and dishonourable?

lord goring.  [_slowly_.]  yes; most men would call it ugly names.  there
is no doubt of that.

sir robert chiltern.  [_bitterly_.]  men who every day do something of
the same kind themselves.  men who, each one of them, have worse secrets
in their own lives.

lord goring.  that is the reason they are so pleased to find out other
people’s secrets.  it distracts public attention from their own.

sir robert chiltern.  and, after all, whom did i wrong by what i did?  no
one.

lord goring.  [_looking at him steadily_.]  except yourself, robert.

sir robert chiltern.  [_after a pause_.]  of course i had private
information about a certain transaction contemplated by the government of
the day, and i acted on it.  private information is practically the
source of every large modern fortune.

lord goring.  [_tapping his boot with his cane_.]  and public scandal
invariably the result.

sir robert chiltern.  [_pacing up and down the room_.]  arthur, do you
think that what i did nearly eighteen years ago should be brought up
against me now?  do you think it fair that a man’s whole career should be
ruined for a fault done in one’s boyhood almost?  i was twenty-two at the
time, and i had the double misfortune of being well-born and poor, two
unforgiveable things nowadays.  is it fair that the folly, the sin of
one’s youth, if men choose to call it a sin, should wreck a life like
mine, should place me in the pillory, should shatter all that i have
worked for, all that i have built up.  is it fair, arthur?

lord goring.  life is never fair, robert.  and perhaps it is a good thing
for most of us that it is not.

sir robert chiltern.  every man of ambition has to fight his century with
its own weapons.  what this century worships is wealth.  the god of this
century is wealth.  to succeed one must have wealth.  at all costs one
must have wealth.

lord goring.  you underrate yourself, robert.  believe me, without wealth
you could have succeeded just as well.

sir robert chiltern.  when i was old, perhaps.  when i had lost my
passion for power, or could not use it.  when i was tired, worn out,
disappointed.  i wanted my success when i was young.  youth is the time
for success.  i couldn’t wait.

lord goring.  well, you certainly have had your success while you are
still young.  no one in our day has had such a brilliant success.
under-secretary for foreign affairs at the age of forty—that’s good
enough for any one, i should think.

sir robert chiltern.  and if it is all taken away from me now?  if i lose
everything over a horrible scandal?  if i am hounded from public life?

lord goring.  robert, how could you have sold yourself for money?

sir robert chiltern.  [_excitedly_.]  i did not sell myself for money.  i
bought success at a great price.  that is all.

lord goring.  [_gravely_.]  yes; you certainly paid a great price for it.
but what first made you think of doing such a thing?

sir robert chiltern.  baron arnheim.

lord goring.  damned scoundrel!

sir robert chiltern.  no; he was a man of a most subtle and refined
intellect.  a man of culture, charm, and distinction.  one of the most
intellectual men i ever met.

lord goring.  ah! i prefer a gentlemanly fool any day.  there is more to
be said for stupidity than people imagine.  personally i have a great
admiration for stupidity.  it is a sort of fellow-feeling, i suppose.
but how did he do it?  tell me the whole thing.

sir robert chiltern.  [_throws himself into an armchair by the
writing-table_.]  one night after dinner at lord radley’s the baron began
talking about success in modern life as something that one could reduce
to an absolutely definite science.  with that wonderfully fascinating
quiet voice of his he expounded to us the most terrible of all
philosophies, the philosophy of power, preached to us the most marvellous
of all gospels, the gospel of gold.  i think he saw the effect he had
produced on me, for some days afterwards he wrote and asked me to come
and see him.  he was living then in park lane, in the house lord woolcomb
has now.  i remember so well how, with a strange smile on his pale,
curved lips, he led me through his wonderful picture gallery, showed me
his tapestries, his enamels, his jewels, his carved ivories, made me
wonder at the strange loveliness of the luxury in which he lived; and
then told me that luxury was nothing but a background, a painted scene in
a play, and that power, power over other men, power over the world, was
the one thing worth having, the one supreme pleasure worth knowing, the
one joy one never tired of, and that in our century only the rich
possessed it.

lord goring.  [_with great deliberation_.]  a thoroughly shallow creed.

sir robert chiltern.  [_rising_.]  i didn’t think so then.  i don’t think
so now.  wealth has given me enormous power.  it gave me at the very
outset of my life freedom, and freedom is everything.  you have never
been poor, and never known what ambition is.  you cannot understand what
a wonderful chance the baron gave me.  such a chance as few men get.

lord goring.  fortunately for them, if one is to judge by results.  but
tell me definitely, how did the baron finally persuade you to—well, to do
what you did?

sir robert chiltern.  when i was going away he said to me that if i ever
could give him any private information of real value he would make me a
very rich man.  i was dazed at the prospect he held out to me, and my
ambition and my desire for power were at that time boundless.  six weeks
later certain private documents passed through my hands.

lord goring.  [_keeping his eyes steadily fixed on the carpet_.]  state
documents?

sir robert chiltern.  yes.  [lord goring _sighs_, _then passes his hand
across his forehead and looks up_.]

lord goring.  i had no idea that you, of all men in the world, could have
been so weak, robert, as to yield to such a temptation as baron arnheim
held out to you.

sir robert chiltern.  weak?  oh, i am sick of hearing that phrase.  sick
of using it about others.  weak?  do you really think, arthur, that it is
weakness that yields to temptation?  i tell you that there are terrible
temptations that it requires strength, strength and courage, to yield to.
to stake all one’s life on a single moment, to risk everything on one
throw, whether the stake be power or pleasure, i care not—there is no
weakness in that.  there is a horrible, a terrible courage.  i had that
courage.  i sat down the same afternoon and wrote baron arnheim the
letter this woman now holds.  he made three-quarters of a million over
the transaction.

lord goring.  and you?

sir robert chiltern.  i received from the baron £110,000.

lord goring.  you were worth more, robert.

sir robert chiltern.  no; that money gave me exactly what i wanted, power
over others.  i went into the house immediately.  the baron advised me in
finance from time to time.  before five years i had almost trebled my
fortune.  since then everything that i have touched has turned out a
success.  in all things connected with money i have had a luck so
extraordinary that sometimes it has made me almost afraid.  i remember
having read somewhere, in some strange book, that when the gods wish to
punish us they answer our prayers.

lord goring.  but tell me, robert, did you never suffer any regret for
what you had done?

sir robert chiltern.  no.  i felt that i had fought the century with its
own weapons, and won.

lord goring.  [_sadly_.]  you thought you had won.

sir robert chiltern.  i thought so.  [_after a long pause_.]  arthur, do
you despise me for what i have told you?

lord goring.  [_with deep feeling in his voice_.]  i am very sorry for
you, robert, very sorry indeed.

sir robert chiltern.  i don’t say that i suffered any remorse.  i didn’t.
not remorse in the ordinary, rather silly sense of the word.  but i have
paid conscience money many times.  i had a wild hope that i might disarm
destiny.  the sum baron arnheim gave me i have distributed twice over in
public charities since then.

lord goring.  [_looking up_.]  in public charities?  dear me! what a lot
of harm you must have done, robert!

sir robert chiltern.  oh, don’t say that, arthur; don’t talk like that!

lord goring.  never mind what i say, robert!  i am always saying what i
shouldn’t say.  in fact, i usually say what i really think.  a great
mistake nowadays.  it makes one so liable to be misunderstood.  as
regards this dreadful business, i will help you in whatever way i can.
of course you know that.

sir robert chiltern.  thank you, arthur, thank you.  but what is to be
done?  what can be done?

lord goring.  [_leaning back with his hands in his pockets_.]  well, the
english can’t stand a man who is always saying he is in the right, but
they are very fond of a man who admits that he has been in the wrong.  it
is one of the best things in them.  however, in your case, robert, a
confession would not do.  the money, if you will allow me to say so, is
. . . awkward.  besides, if you did make a clean breast of the whole
affair, you would never be able to talk morality again.  and in england a
man who can’t talk morality twice a week to a large, popular, immoral
audience is quite over as a serious politician.  there would be nothing
left for him as a profession except botany or the church.  a confession
would be of no use.  it would ruin you.

sir robert chiltern.  it would ruin me.  arthur, the only thing for me to
do now is to fight the thing out.

lord goring.  [_rising from his chair_.]  i was waiting for you to say
that, robert.  it is the only thing to do now.  and you must begin by
telling your wife the whole story.

sir robert chiltern.  that i will not do.

lord goring.  robert, believe me, you are wrong.

sir robert chiltern.  i couldn’t do it.  it would kill her love for me.
and now about this woman, this mrs. cheveley.  how can i defend myself
against her?  you knew her before, arthur, apparently.

lord goring.  yes.

sir robert chiltern.  did you know her well?

lord goring.  [_arranging his necktie_.]  so little that i got engaged to
be married to her once, when i was staying at the tenbys’.  the affair
lasted for three days . . . nearly.

sir robert chiltern.  why was it broken off?

lord goring.  [_airily_.]  oh, i forget.  at least, it makes no matter.
by the way, have you tried her with money?  she used to be confoundedly
fond of money.

sir robert chiltern.  i offered her any sum she wanted.  she refused.

lord goring.  then the marvellous gospel of gold breaks down sometimes.
the rich can’t do everything, after all.

sir robert chiltern.  not everything.  i suppose you are right.  arthur,
i feel that public disgrace is in store for me.  i feel certain of it.  i
never knew what terror was before.  i know it now.  it is as if a hand of
ice were laid upon one’s heart.  it is as if one’s heart were beating
itself to death in some empty hollow.

lord goring.  [_striking the table_.]  robert, you must fight her.  you
must fight her.

sir robert chiltern.  but how?

lord goring.  i can’t tell you how at present.  i have not the smallest
idea.  but every one has some weak point.  there is some flaw in each one
of us.  [_strolls to the fireplace and looks at himself in the glass_.]
my father tells me that even i have faults.  perhaps i have.  i don’t
know.

sir robert chiltern.  in defending myself against mrs. cheveley, i have a
right to use any weapon i can find, have i not?

lord goring.  [_still looking in the glass_.]  in your place i don’t
think i should have the smallest scruple in doing so.  she is thoroughly
well able to take care of herself.

sir robert chiltern.  [_sits down at the table and takes a pen in his
hand_.]  well, i shall send a cipher telegram to the embassy at vienna,
to inquire if there is anything known against her.  there may be some
secret scandal she might be afraid of.

lord goring.  [_settling his buttonhole_.]  oh, i should fancy mrs.
cheveley is one of those very modern women of our time who find a new
scandal as becoming as a new bonnet, and air them both in the park every
afternoon at five-thirty.  i am sure she adores scandals, and that the
sorrow of her life at present is that she can’t manage to have enough of
them.

sir robert chiltern.  [_writing_.]  why do you say that?

lord goring.  [_turning round_.]  well, she wore far too much rouge last
night, and not quite enough clothes.  that is always a sign of despair in
a woman.

sir robert chiltern.  [_striking a bell_.]  but it is worth while my
wiring to vienna, is it not?

lord goring.  it is always worth while asking a question, though it is
not always worth while answering one.

[_enter_ mason.]

sir robert chiltern.  is mr. trafford in his room?

mason.  yes, sir robert.

sir robert chiltern.  [_puts what he has written into an envelope_,
_which he then carefully closes_.]  tell him to have this sent off in
cipher at once.  there must not be a moment’s delay.

mason.  yes, sir robert.

sir robert chiltern.  oh! just give that back to me again.

[_writes something on the envelope_.  mason _then goes out with the
letter_.]

sir robert chiltern.  she must have had some curious hold over baron
arnheim.  i wonder what it was.

lord goring.  [_smiling_.]  i wonder.

sir robert chiltern.  i will fight her to the death, as long as my wife
knows nothing.

lord goring.  [_strongly_.]  oh, fight in any case—in any case.

sir robert chiltern.  [_with a gesture of despair_.]  if my wife found
out, there would be little left to fight for.  well, as soon as i hear
from vienna, i shall let you know the result.  it is a chance, just a
chance, but i believe in it.  and as i fought the age with its own
weapons, i will fight her with her weapons.  it is only fair, and she
looks like a woman with a past, doesn’t she?

lord goring.  most pretty women do.  but there is a fashion in pasts just
as there is a fashion in frocks.  perhaps mrs. cheveley’s past is merely
a slightly décolleté one, and they are excessively popular nowadays.
besides, my dear robert, i should not build too high hopes on frightening
mrs. cheveley.  i should not fancy mrs. cheveley is a woman who would be
easily frightened.  she has survived all her creditors, and she shows
wonderful presence of mind.

sir robert chiltern.  oh! i live on hopes now.  i clutch at every chance.
i feel like a man on a ship that is sinking.  the water is round my feet,
and the very air is bitter with storm.  hush! i hear my wife’s voice.

[_enter_ lady chiltern _in walking dress_.]

lady chiltern.  good afternoon, lord goring!

lord goring.  good afternoon, lady chiltern!  have you been in the park?

lady chiltern.  no; i have just come from the woman’s liberal
association, where, by the way, robert, your name was received with loud
applause, and now i have come in to have my tea.  [_to_ lord goring.]
you will wait and have some tea, won’t you?

lord goring.  i’ll wait for a short time, thanks.

lady chiltern.  i will be back in a moment.  i am only going to take my
hat off.

lord goring.  [_in his most earnest manner_.]  oh! please don’t.  it is
so pretty.  one of the prettiest hats i ever saw.  i hope the woman’s
liberal association received it with loud applause.

lady chiltern.  [_with a smile_.]  we have much more important work to do
than look at each other’s bonnets, lord goring.

lord goring.  really?  what sort of work?

lady chiltern.  oh! dull, useful, delightful things, factory acts, female
inspectors, the eight hours’ bill, the parliamentary franchise. . . .
everything, in fact, that you would find thoroughly uninteresting.

lord goring.  and never bonnets?

lady chiltern.  [_with mock indignation_.]  never bonnets, never!

[lady chiltern _goes out through the door leading to her boudoir_.]

sir robert chiltern.  [_takes_ lord goring’s _hand_.]  you have been a
good friend to me, arthur, a thoroughly good friend.

lord goring.  i don’t know that i have been able to do much for you,
robert, as yet.  in fact, i have not been able to do anything for you, as
far as i can see.  i am thoroughly disappointed with myself.

sir robert chiltern.  you have enabled me to tell you the truth.  that is
something.  the truth has always stifled me.

lord goring.  ah! the truth is a thing i get rid of as soon as possible!
bad habit, by the way.  makes one very unpopular at the club . . . with
the older members.  they call it being conceited.  perhaps it is.

sir robert chiltern.  i would to god that i had been able to tell the
truth . . . to live the truth.  ah! that is the great thing in life, to
live the truth.  [_sighs_, _and goes towards the door_.]  i’ll see you
soon again, arthur, shan’t i?

lord goring.  certainly.  whenever you like.  i’m going to look in at the
bachelors’ ball to-night, unless i find something better to do.  but i’ll
come round to-morrow morning.  if you should want me to-night by any
chance, send round a note to curzon street.

sir robert chiltern.  thank you.

[_as he reaches the door_, lady chiltern _enters from her boudoir_.]

lady chiltern.  you are not going, robert?

sir robert chiltern.  i have some letters to write, dear.

lady chiltern.  [_going to him_.]  you work too hard, robert.  you seem
never to think of yourself, and you are looking so tired.

sir robert chiltern.  it is nothing, dear, nothing.

[_he kisses her and goes out_.]

lady chiltern.  [_to_ lord goring.]  do sit down.  i am so glad you have
called.  i want to talk to you about . . . well, not about bonnets, or
the woman’s liberal association.  you take far too much interest in the
first subject, and not nearly enough in the second.

lord goring.  you want to talk to me about mrs. cheveley?

lady chiltern.  yes.  you have guessed it.  after you left last night i
found out that what she had said was really true.  of course i made
robert write her a letter at once, withdrawing his promise.

lord goring.  so he gave me to understand.

lady chiltern.  to have kept it would have been the first stain on a
career that has been stainless always.  robert must be above reproach.
he is not like other men.  he cannot afford to do what other men do.
[_she looks at_ lord goring, _who remains silent_.]  don’t you agree with
me?  you are robert’s greatest friend.  you are our greatest friend, lord
goring.  no one, except myself, knows robert better than you do.  he has
no secrets from me, and i don’t think he has any from you.

lord goring.  he certainly has no secrets from me.  at least i don’t
think so.

lady chiltern.  then am i not right in my estimate of him?  i know i am
right.  but speak to me frankly.

lord goring.  [_looking straight at her_.]  quite frankly?

lady chiltern.  surely.  you have nothing to conceal, have you?

lord goring.  nothing.  but, my dear lady chiltern, i think, if you will
allow me to say so, that in practical life—

lady chiltern.  [_smiling_.]  of which you know so little, lord goring—

lord goring.  of which i know nothing by experience, though i know
something by observation.  i think that in practical life there is
something about success, actual success, that is a little unscrupulous,
something about ambition that is unscrupulous always.  once a man has set
his heart and soul on getting to a certain point, if he has to climb the
crag, he climbs the crag; if he has to walk in the mire—

lady chiltern.  well?

lord goring.  he walks in the mire.  of course i am only talking
generally about life.

lady chiltern.  [_gravely_.]  i hope so.  why do you look at me so
strangely, lord goring?

lord goring.  lady chiltern, i have sometimes thought that . . . perhaps
you are a little hard in some of your views on life.  i think that . . .
often you don’t make sufficient allowances.  in every nature there are
elements of weakness, or worse than weakness.  supposing, for instance,
that—that any public man, my father, or lord merton, or robert, say, had,
years ago, written some foolish letter to some one . . .

lady chiltern.  what do you mean by a foolish letter?

lord goring.  a letter gravely compromising one’s position.  i am only
putting an imaginary case.

lady chiltern.  robert is as incapable of doing a foolish thing as he is
of doing a wrong thing.

lord goring.  [_after a long pause_.]  nobody is incapable of doing a
foolish thing.  nobody is incapable of doing a wrong thing.

lady chiltern.  are you a pessimist?  what will the other dandies say?
they will all have to go into mourning.

lord goring.  [_rising_.]  no, lady chiltern, i am not a pessimist.
indeed i am not sure that i quite know what pessimism really means.  all
i do know is that life cannot be understood without much charity, cannot
be lived without much charity.  it is love, and not german philosophy,
that is the true explanation of this world, whatever may be the
explanation of the next.  and if you are ever in trouble, lady chiltern,
trust me absolutely, and i will help you in every way i can.  if you ever
want me, come to me for my assistance, and you shall have it.  come at
once to me.

lady chiltern.  [_looking at him in surprise_.]  lord goring, you are
talking quite seriously.  i don’t think i ever heard you talk seriously
before.

lord goring.  [_laughing_.]  you must excuse me, lady chiltern.  it won’t
occur again, if i can help it.

lady chiltern.  but i like you to be serious.

[_enter_ mabel chiltern, _in the most ravishing frock_.]

mabel chiltern.  dear gertrude, don’t say such a dreadful thing to lord
goring.  seriousness would be very unbecoming to him.  good afternoon
lord goring!  pray be as trivial as you can.

lord goring.  i should like to, miss mabel, but i am afraid i am . . . a
little out of practice this morning; and besides, i have to be going now.

mabel chiltern.  just when i have come in!  what dreadful manners you
have!  i am sure you were very badly brought up.

lord goring.  i was.

mabel chiltern.  i wish i had brought you up!

lord goring.  i am so sorry you didn’t.

mabel chiltern.  it is too late now, i suppose?

lord goring.  [_smiling_.]  i am not so sure.

mabel chiltern.  will you ride to-morrow morning?

lord goring.  yes, at ten.

mabel chiltern.  don’t forget.

lord goring.  of course i shan’t.  by the way, lady chiltern, there is no
list of your guests in _the morning post_ of to-day.  it has apparently
been crowded out by the county council, or the lambeth conference, or
something equally boring.  could you let me have a list?  i have a
particular reason for asking you.

lady chiltern.  i am sure mr. trafford will be able to give you one.

lord goring.  thanks, so much.

mabel chiltern.  tommy is the most useful person in london.

lord goring [_turning to her_.]  and who is the most ornamental?

mabel chiltern [_triumphantly_.]  i am.

lord goring.  how clever of you to guess it!  [_takes up his hat and
cane_.]  good-bye, lady chiltern!  you will remember what i said to you,
won’t you?

lady chiltern.  yes; but i don’t know why you said it to me.

lord goring.  i hardly know myself.  good-bye, miss mabel!

mabel chiltern [_with a little moue of disappointment_.]  i wish you were
not going.  i have had four wonderful adventures this morning; four and a
half, in fact.  you might stop and listen to some of them.

lord goring.  how very selfish of you to have four and a half!  there
won’t be any left for me.

mabel chiltern.  i don’t want you to have any.  they would not be good
for you.

lord goring.  that is the first unkind thing you have ever said to me.
how charmingly you said it!  ten to-morrow.

mabel chiltern.  sharp.

lord goring.  quite sharp.  but don’t bring mr. trafford.

mabel chiltern.  [_with a little toss of the head_.]  of course i shan’t
bring tommy trafford.  tommy trafford is in great disgrace.

lord goring.  i am delighted to hear it.  [_bows and goes out_.]

mabel chiltern.  gertrude, i wish you would speak to tommy trafford.

lady chiltern.  what has poor mr. trafford done this time?  robert says
he is the best secretary he has ever had.

mabel chiltern.  well, tommy has proposed to me again.  tommy really does
nothing but propose to me.  he proposed to me last night in the
music-room, when i was quite unprotected, as there was an elaborate trio
going on.  i didn’t dare to make the smallest repartee, i need hardly
tell you.  if i had, it would have stopped the music at once.  musical
people are so absurdly unreasonable.  they always want one to be
perfectly dumb at the very moment when one is longing to be absolutely
deaf.  then he proposed to me in broad daylight this morning, in front of
that dreadful statue of achilles.  really, the things that go on in front
of that work of art are quite appalling.  the police should interfere.
at luncheon i saw by the glare in his eye that he was going to propose
again, and i just managed to check him in time by assuring him that i was
a bimetallist.  fortunately i don’t know what bimetallism means.  and i
don’t believe anybody else does either.  but the observation crushed
tommy for ten minutes.  he looked quite shocked.  and then tommy is so
annoying in the way he proposes.  if he proposed at the top of his voice,
i should not mind so much.  that might produce some effect on the public.
but he does it in a horrid confidential way.  when tommy wants to be
romantic he talks to one just like a doctor.  i am very fond of tommy,
but his methods of proposing are quite out of date.  i wish, gertrude,
you would speak to him, and tell him that once a week is quite often
enough to propose to any one, and that it should always be done in a
manner that attracts some attention.

lady chiltern.  dear mabel, don’t talk like that.  besides, robert thinks
very highly of mr. trafford.  he believes he has a brilliant future
before him.

mabel chiltern.  oh! i wouldn’t marry a man with a future before him for
anything under the sun.

lady chiltern.  mabel!

mabel chiltern.  i know, dear.  you married a man with a future, didn’t
you?  but then robert was a genius, and you have a noble,
self-sacrificing character.  you can stand geniuses.  i have no character
at all, and robert is the only genius i could ever bear.  as a rule, i
think they are quite impossible.  geniuses talk so much, don’t they?
such a bad habit!  and they are always thinking about themselves, when i
want them to be thinking about me.  i must go round now and rehearse at
lady basildon’s.  you remember, we are having tableaux, don’t you?  the
triumph of something, i don’t know what!  i hope it will be triumph of
me.  only triumph i am really interested in at present.  [_kisses_ lady
chiltern _and goes out_; _then comes running back_.]  oh, gertrude, do
you know who is coming to see you?  that dreadful mrs. cheveley, in a
most lovely gown.  did you ask her?

lady chiltern.  [_rising_.]  mrs. cheveley!  coming to see me?
impossible!

mabel chiltern.  i assure you she is coming upstairs, as large as life
and not nearly so natural.

lady chiltern.  you need not wait, mabel.  remember, lady basildon is
expecting you.

mabel chiltern.  oh! i must shake hands with lady markby.  she is
delightful.  i love being scolded by her.

[_enter_ mason.]

mason.  lady markby.  mrs. cheveley.

[_enter_ lady markby _and_ mrs. cheveley.]

lady chiltern.  [_advancing to meet them_.]  dear lady markby, how nice
of you to come and see me!  [_shakes hands with her_, _and bows somewhat
distantly to_ mrs. cheveley.]  won’t you sit down, mrs. cheveley?

mrs. cheveley.  thanks.  isn’t that miss chiltern?  i should like so much
to know her.

lady chiltern.  mabel, mrs. cheveley wishes to know you.

[mabel chiltern _gives a little nod_.]

mrs. cheveley [_sitting down_.]  i thought your frock so charming last
night, miss chiltern.  so simple and . . . suitable.

mabel chiltern.  really?  i must tell my dressmaker.  it will be such a
surprise to her.  good-bye, lady markby!

lady markby.  going already?

mabel chiltern.  i am so sorry but i am obliged to.  i am just off to
rehearsal.  i have got to stand on my head in some tableaux.

lady markby.  on your head, child?  oh! i hope not.  i believe it is most
unhealthy.  [_takes a seat on the sofa next_ lady chiltern.]

mabel chiltern.  but it is for an excellent charity: in aid of the
undeserving, the only people i am really interested in.  i am the
secretary, and tommy trafford is treasurer.

mrs. cheveley.  and what is lord goring?

mabel chiltern.  oh! lord goring is president.

mrs. cheveley.  the post should suit him admirably, unless he has
deteriorated since i knew him first.

lady markby.  [_reflecting_.]  you are remarkably modern, mabel.  a
little too modern, perhaps.  nothing is so dangerous as being too modern.
one is apt to grow old-fashioned quite suddenly.  i have known many
instances of it.

mabel chiltern.  what a dreadful prospect!

lady markby.  ah! my dear, you need not be nervous.  you will always be
as pretty as possible.  that is the best fashion there is, and the only
fashion that england succeeds in setting.

mabel chiltern.  [_with a curtsey_.]  thank you so much, lady markby, for
england . . . and myself.  [_goes out_.]

lady markby.  [_turning to_ lady chiltern.]  dear gertrude, we just
called to know if mrs. cheveley’s diamond brooch has been found.

lady chiltern.  here?

mrs. cheveley.  yes.  i missed it when i got back to claridge’s, and i
thought i might possibly have dropped it here.

lady chiltern.  i have heard nothing about it.  but i will send for the
butler and ask.  [_touches the bell_.]

mrs. cheveley.  oh, pray don’t trouble, lady chiltern.  i dare say i lost
it at the opera, before we came on here.

lady markby.  ah yes, i suppose it must have been at the opera.  the fact
is, we all scramble and jostle so much nowadays that i wonder we have
anything at all left on us at the end of an evening.  i know myself that,
when i am coming back from the drawing room, i always feel as if i hadn’t
a shred on me, except a small shred of decent reputation, just enough to
prevent the lower classes making painful observations through the windows
of the carriage.  the fact is that our society is terribly
over-populated.  really, some one should arrange a proper scheme of
assisted emigration.  it would do a great deal of good.

mrs. cheveley.  i quite agree with you, lady markby.  it is nearly six
years since i have been in london for the season, and i must say society
has become dreadfully mixed.  one sees the oddest people everywhere.

lady markby.  that is quite true, dear.  but one needn’t know them.  i’m
sure i don’t know half the people who come to my house.  indeed, from all
i hear, i shouldn’t like to.

[_enter_ mason.]

lady chiltern.  what sort of a brooch was it that you lost, mrs.
cheveley?

mrs. cheveley.  a diamond snake-brooch with a ruby, a rather large ruby.

lady markby.  i thought you said there was a sapphire on the head, dear?

mrs. cheveley [_smiling_.]  no, lady markby—a ruby.

lady markby.  [_nodding her head_.]  and very becoming, i am quite sure.

lady chiltern.  has a ruby and diamond brooch been found in any of the
rooms this morning, mason?

mason.  no, my lady.

mrs. cheveley.  it really is of no consequence, lady chiltern.  i am so
sorry to have put you to any inconvenience.

lady chiltern.  [_coldly_.]  oh, it has been no inconvenience.  that will
do, mason.  you can bring tea.

[_exit_ mason.]

lady markby.  well, i must say it is most annoying to lose anything.  i
remember once at bath, years ago, losing in the pump room an exceedingly
handsome cameo bracelet that sir john had given me.  i don’t think he has
ever given me anything since, i am sorry to say.  he has sadly
degenerated.  really, this horrid house of commons quite ruins our
husbands for us.  i think the lower house by far the greatest blow to a
happy married life that there has been since that terrible thing called
the higher education of women was invented.

lady chiltern.  ah! it is heresy to say that in this house, lady markby.
robert is a great champion of the higher education of women, and so, i am
afraid, am i.

mrs. cheveley.  the higher education of men is what i should like to see.
men need it so sadly.

lady markby.  they do, dear.  but i am afraid such a scheme would be
quite unpractical.  i don’t think man has much capacity for development.
he has got as far as he can, and that is not far, is it?  with regard to
women, well, dear gertrude, you belong to the younger generation, and i
am sure it is all right if you approve of it.  in my time, of course, we
were taught not to understand anything.  that was the old system, and
wonderfully interesting it was.  i assure you that the amount of things i
and my poor dear sister were taught not to understand was quite
extraordinary.  but modern women understand everything, i am told.

mrs. cheveley.  except their husbands.  that is the one thing the modern
woman never understands.

lady markby.  and a very good thing too, dear, i dare say.  it might
break up many a happy home if they did.  not yours, i need hardly say,
gertrude.  you have married a pattern husband.  i wish i could say as
much for myself.  but since sir john has taken to attending the debates
regularly, which he never used to do in the good old days, his language
has become quite impossible.  he always seems to think that he is
addressing the house, and consequently whenever he discusses the state of
the agricultural labourer, or the welsh church, or something quite
improper of that kind, i am obliged to send all the servants out of the
room.  it is not pleasant to see one’s own butler, who has been with one
for twenty-three years, actually blushing at the side-board, and the
footmen making contortions in corners like persons in circuses.  i assure
you my life will be quite ruined unless they send john at once to the
upper house.  he won’t take any interest in politics then, will he?  the
house of lords is so sensible.  an assembly of gentlemen.  but in his
present state, sir john is really a great trial.  why, this morning
before breakfast was half over, he stood up on the hearthrug, put his
hands in his pockets, and appealed to the country at the top of his
voice.  i left the table as soon as i had my second cup of tea, i need
hardly say.  but his violent language could be heard all over the house!
i trust, gertrude, that sir robert is not like that?

lady chiltern.  but i am very much interested in politics, lady markby.
i love to hear robert talk about them.

lady markby.  well, i hope he is not as devoted to blue books as sir john
is.  i don’t think they can be quite improving reading for any one.

mrs. cheveley [_languidly_.]  i have never read a blue book.  i prefer
books . . . in yellow covers.

lady markby.  [_genially unconscious_.]  yellow is a gayer colour, is it
not?  i used to wear yellow a good deal in my early days, and would do so
now if sir john was not so painfully personal in his observations, and a
man on the question of dress is always ridiculous, is he not?

mrs. cheveley.  oh, no!  i think men are the only authorities on dress.

lady markby.  really?  one wouldn’t say so from the sort of hats they
wear? would one?

[_the butler enters_, _followed by the footman_.  _tea is set on a small
table close to_ lady chiltern.]

lady chiltern.  may i give you some tea, mrs. cheveley?

mrs. cheveley.  thanks.  [_the butler hands_ mrs. cheveley _a cup of tea
on a salver_.]

lady chiltern.  some tea, lady markby?

lady markby.  no thanks, dear.  [_the servants go out_.]  the fact is, i
have promised to go round for ten minutes to see poor lady brancaster,
who is in very great trouble.  her daughter, quite a well-brought-up
girl, too, has actually become engaged to be married to a curate in
shropshire.  it is very sad, very sad indeed.  i can’t understand this
modern mania for curates.  in my time we girls saw them, of course,
running about the place like rabbits.  but we never took any notice of
them, i need hardly say.  but i am told that nowadays country society is
quite honeycombed with them.  i think it most irreligious.  and then the
eldest son has quarrelled with his father, and it is said that when they
meet at the club lord brancaster always hides himself behind the money
article in _the times_.  however, i believe that is quite a common
occurrence nowadays and that they have to take in extra copies of _the
times_ at all the clubs in st. james’s street; there are so many sons who
won’t have anything to do with their fathers, and so many fathers who
won’t speak to their sons.  i think myself, it is very much to be
regretted.

mrs. cheveley.  so do i.  fathers have so much to learn from their sons
nowadays.

lady markby.  really, dear?  what?

mrs. cheveley.  the art of living.  the only really fine art we have
produced in modern times.

lady markby.  [_shaking her head_.]  ah!  i am afraid lord brancaster
knew a good deal about that.  more than his poor wife ever did.
[_turning to_ lady chiltern.]  you know lady brancaster, don’t you, dear?

lady chiltern.  just slightly.  she was staying at langton last autumn,
when we were there.

lady markby.  well, like all stout women, she looks the very picture of
happiness, as no doubt you noticed.  but there are many tragedies in her
family, besides this affair of the curate.  her own sister, mrs. jekyll,
had a most unhappy life; through no fault of her own, i am sorry to say.
she ultimately was so broken-hearted that she went into a convent, or on
to the operatic stage, i forget which.  no; i think it was decorative
art-needlework she took up.  i know she had lost all sense of pleasure in
life.  [_rising_.]  and now, gertrude, if you will allow me, i shall
leave mrs. cheveley in your charge and call back for her in a quarter of
an hour.  or perhaps, dear mrs. cheveley, you wouldn’t mind waiting in
the carriage while i am with lady brancaster.  as i intend it to be a
visit of condolence, i shan’t stay long.

mrs. cheveley [_rising_.]  i don’t mind waiting in the carriage at all,
provided there is somebody to look at one.

lady markby.  well, i hear the curate is always prowling about the house.

mrs. cheveley.  i am afraid i am not fond of girl friends.

lady chiltern [_rising_.]  oh, i hope mrs. cheveley will stay here a
little.  i should like to have a few minutes’ conversation with her.

mrs. cheveley.  how very kind of you, lady chiltern!  believe me, nothing
would give me greater pleasure.

lady markby.  ah! no doubt you both have many pleasant reminiscences of
your schooldays to talk over together.  good-bye, dear gertrude!  shall i
see you at lady bonar’s to-night?  she has discovered a wonderful new
genius.  he does . . . nothing at all, i believe.  that is a great
comfort, is it not?

lady chiltern.  robert and i are dining at home by ourselves to-night,
and i don’t think i shall go anywhere afterwards.  robert, of course,
will have to be in the house.  but there is nothing interesting on.

lady markby.  dining at home by yourselves?  is that quite prudent?  ah,
i forgot, your husband is an exception.  mine is the general rule, and
nothing ages a woman so rapidly as having married the general rule.
[_exit_ lady markby.]

mrs. cheveley.  wonderful woman, lady markby, isn’t she?  talks more and
says less than anybody i ever met.  she is made to be a public speaker.
much more so than her husband, though he is a typical englishman, always
dull and usually violent.

lady chiltern.  [_makes no answer_, _but remains standing_.  _there is a
pause_.  _then the eyes of the two women meet_.  lady chiltern _looks
stern and pale_.  mrs. cheveley _seem rather amused_.]  mrs. cheveley, i
think it is right to tell you quite frankly that, had i known who you
really were, i should not have invited you to my house last night.

mrs. cheveley [_with an impertinent smile_.]  really?

lady chiltern.  i could not have done so.

mrs. cheveley.  i see that after all these years you have not changed a
bit, gertrude.

lady chiltern.  i never change.

mrs. cheveley [_elevating her eyebrows_.]  then life has taught you
nothing?

lady chiltern.  it has taught me that a person who has once been guilty
of a dishonest and dishonourable action may be guilty of it a second
time, and should be shunned.

mrs. cheveley.  would you apply that rule to every one?

lady chiltern.  yes, to every one, without exception.

mrs. cheveley.  then i am sorry for you, gertrude, very sorry for you.

lady chiltern.  you see now, i was sure, that for many reasons any
further acquaintance between us during your stay in london is quite
impossible?

mrs. cheveley [_leaning back in her chair_.]  do you know, gertrude, i
don’t mind your talking morality a bit.  morality is simply the attitude
we adopt towards people whom we personally dislike.  you dislike me.  i
am quite aware of that.  and i have always detested you.  and yet i have
come here to do you a service.

lady chiltern.  [_contemptuously_.]  like the service you wished to
render my husband last night, i suppose.  thank heaven, i saved him from
that.

mrs. cheveley.  [_starting to her feet_.]  it was you who made him write
that insolent letter to me?  it was you who made him break his promise?

lady chiltern.  yes.

mrs. cheveley.  then you must make him keep it.  i give you till
to-morrow morning—no more.  if by that time your husband does not
solemnly bind himself to help me in this great scheme in which i am
interested—

lady chiltern.  this fraudulent speculation—

mrs. cheveley.  call it what you choose.  i hold your husband in the
hollow of my hand, and if you are wise you will make him do what i tell
him.

lady chiltern.  [_rising and going towards her_.]  you are impertinent.
what has my husband to do with you?  with a woman like you?

mrs. cheveley [_with a bitter laugh_.]  in this world like meets with
like.  it is because your husband is himself fraudulent and dishonest
that we pair so well together.  between you and him there are chasms.  he
and i are closer than friends.  we are enemies linked together.  the same
sin binds us.

lady chiltern.  how dare you class my husband with yourself?  how dare
you threaten him or me?  leave my house.  you are unfit to enter it.

[sir robert chiltern _enters from behind_.  _he hears his wife’s last
words_, _and sees to whom they are addressed_.  _he grows deadly pale_.]

mrs. cheveley.  your house!  a house bought with the price of dishonour.
a house, everything in which has been paid for by fraud.  [_turns round
and sees_ sir robert chiltern.]  ask him what the origin of his fortune
is!  get him to tell you how he sold to a stockbroker a cabinet secret.
learn from him to what you owe your position.

lady chiltern.  it is not true!  robert!  it is not true!

mrs. cheveley.  [_pointing at him with outstretched finger_.]  look at
him!  can he deny it?  does he dare to?

sir robert chiltern.  go!  go at once.  you have done your worst now.

mrs. cheveley.  my worst?  i have not yet finished with you, with either
of you.  i give you both till to-morrow at noon.  if by then you don’t do
what i bid you to do, the whole world shall know the origin of robert
chiltern.

[sir robert chiltern _strikes the bell_.  _enter_ mason.]

sir robert chiltern.  show mrs. cheveley out.

[mrs. cheveley _starts_; _then bows with somewhat exaggerated politeness
to_ lady chiltern, _who makes no sign of response_.  _as she passes by_
sir robert chiltern, _who is standing close to the door_, _she pauses for
a moment and looks him straight in the face_.  _she then goes out_,
_followed by the servant_, _who closes the door after him_.  _the husband
and wife are left alone_.  lady chiltern _stands like some one in a
dreadful dream_.  _then she turns round and looks at her husband_.  _she
looks at him with strange eyes_, _as though she were seeing him for the
first time_.]

lady chiltern.  you sold a cabinet secret for money!  you began your life
with fraud!  you built up your career on dishonour!  oh, tell me it is
not true!  lie to me!  lie to me!  tell me it is not true!

sir robert chiltern.  what this woman said is quite true.  but, gertrude,
listen to me.  you don’t realise how i was tempted.  let me tell you the
whole thing. [_goes towards her_.]

lady chiltern.  don’t come near me.  don’t touch me.  i feel as if you
had soiled me for ever.  oh! what a mask you have been wearing all these
years!  a horrible painted mask!  you sold yourself for money.  oh! a
common thief were better.  you put yourself up to sale to the highest
bidder!  you were bought in the market.  you lied to the whole world.
and yet you will not lie to me.

sir robert chiltern.  [_rushing towards her_.]  gertrude!  gertrude!

lady chiltern.  [_thrusting him back with outstretched hands_.]  no,
don’t speak!  say nothing!  your voice wakes terrible memories—memories
of things that made me love you—memories of words that made me love
you—memories that now are horrible to me.  and how i worshipped you!  you
were to me something apart from common life, a thing pure, noble, honest,
without stain.  the world seemed to me finer because you were in it, and
goodness more real because you lived.  and now—oh, when i think that i
made of a man like you my ideal! the ideal of my life!

sir robert chiltern.  there was your mistake.  there was your error.  the
error all women commit.  why can’t you women love us, faults and all?
why do you place us on monstrous pedestals?  we have all feet of clay,
women as well as men; but when we men love women, we love them knowing
their weaknesses, their follies, their imperfections, love them all the
more, it may be, for that reason.  it is not the perfect, but the
imperfect, who have need of love.  it is when we are wounded by our own
hands, or by the hands of others, that love should come to cure us—else
what use is love at all?  all sins, except a sin against itself, love
should forgive.  all lives, save loveless lives, true love should pardon.
a man’s love is like that.  it is wider, larger, more human than a
woman’s.  women think that they are making ideals of men.  what they are
making of us are false idols merely.  you made your false idol of me, and
i had not the courage to come down, show you my wounds, tell you my
weaknesses.  i was afraid that i might lose your love, as i have lost it
now.  and so, last night you ruined my life for me—yes, ruined it!  what
this woman asked of me was nothing compared to what she offered to me.
she offered security, peace, stability.  the sin of my youth, that i had
thought was buried, rose up in front of me, hideous, horrible, with its
hands at my throat.  i could have killed it for ever, sent it back into
its tomb, destroyed its record, burned the one witness against me.  you
prevented me.  no one but you, you know it.  and now what is there before
me but public disgrace, ruin, terrible shame, the mockery of the world, a
lonely dishonoured life, a lonely dishonoured death, it may be, some day?
let women make no more ideals of men! let them not put them on alters and
bow before them, or they may ruin other lives as completely as you—you
whom i have so wildly loved—have ruined mine!

[_he passes from the room_.  lady chiltern _rushes towards him_, _but the
door is closed when she reaches it_.  _pale with anguish_, _bewildered_,
_helpless_, _she sways like a plant in the water_.  _her hands_,
_outstretched_, _seem to tremble in the air like blossoms in the mind_.
_then she flings herself down beside a sofa and buries her face_.  _her
sobs are like the sobs of a child_.]

                                 act drop




third act


scene


_the library in lord goring’s house_.  _an adam room_.  _on the right is
the door leading into the hall_.  _on the left_, _the door of the
smoking-room_.  _a pair of folding doors at the back open into the
drawing-room_.  _the fire is lit_.  _phipps_, _the butler_, _is arranging
some newspapers on the writing-table_.  _the distinction of phipps is his
impassivity_. _he has been termed by enthusiasts the ideal butler_.  _the
sphinx is not so incommunicable_.  _he is a mask with a manner_.  _of his
intellectual or emotional life_, _history knows nothing_.  _he represents
the dominance of form_.

[_enter_ lord goring _in evening dress with a buttonhole_.  _he is
wearing a silk hat and inverness cape_.  _white-gloved_, _he carries a
louis seize cane_.  _his are all the delicate fopperies of fashion_.
_one sees that he stands in immediate relation to modern life_, _makes it
indeed_, _and so masters it_.  _he is the first well-dressed philosopher
in the history of thought_.]

lord goring.  got my second buttonhole for me, phipps?

phipps.  yes, my lord.  [_takes his hat_, _cane_, _and cape_, _and
presents new buttonhole on salver_.]

lord goring.  rather distinguished thing, phipps.  i am the only person
of the smallest importance in london at present who wears a buttonhole.

phipps.  yes, my lord.  i have observed that,

lord goring.  [_taking out old buttonhole_.]  you see, phipps, fashion is
what one wears oneself.  what is unfashionable is what other people wear.

phipps.  yes, my lord.

lord goring.  just as vulgarity is simply the conduct of other people.

phipps.  yes, my lord.

lord goring.  [_putting in a new buttonhole_.]  and falsehoods the truths
of other people.

phipps.  yes, my lord.

lord goring.  other people are quite dreadful.  the only possible society
is oneself.

phipps.  yes, my lord.

lord goring.  to love oneself is the beginning of a lifelong romance,
phipps.

phipps.  yes, my lord.

lord goring.  [_looking at himself in the glass_.]  don’t think i quite
like this buttonhole, phipps.  makes me look a little too old.  makes me
almost in the prime of life, eh, phipps?

phipps.  i don’t observe any alteration in your lordship’s appearance.

lord goring.  you don’t, phipps?

phipps.  no, my lord.

lord goring.  i am not quite sure.  for the future a more trivial
buttonhole, phipps, on thursday evenings.

phipps.  i will speak to the florist, my lord.  she has had a loss in her
family lately, which perhaps accounts for the lack of triviality your
lordship complains of in the buttonhole.

lord goring.  extraordinary thing about the lower classes in england—they
are always losing their relations.

phipps.  yes, my lord!  they are extremely fortunate in that respect.

lord goring.  [_turns round and looks at him_.  phipps _remains
impassive_.]  hum!  any letters, phipps?

phipps.  three, my lord.  [_hands letters on a salver_.]

lord goring.  [_takes letters_.]  want my cab round in twenty minutes.

phipps.  yes, my lord.  [_goes towards door_.]

lord goring.  [_holds up letter in pink envelope_.]  ahem!  phipps, when
did this letter arrive?

phipps.  it was brought by hand just after your lordship went to the
club.

lord goring.  that will do.  [_exit_ phipps.]  lady chiltern’s
handwriting on lady chiltern’s pink notepaper.  that is rather curious.
i thought robert was to write.  wonder what lady chiltern has got to say
to me?  [_sits at bureau and opens letter_, _and reads it_.]  ‘i want
you.  i trust you.  i am coming to you.  gertrude.’  [_puts down the
letter with a puzzled look_.  _then takes it up_, _and reads it again
slowly_.]  ‘i want you.  i trust you.  i am coming to you.’  so she has
found out everything!  poor woman!  poor woman!  [ _pulls out watch and
looks at it_.]  but what an hour to call!  ten o’clock!  i shall have to
give up going to the berkshires.  however, it is always nice to be
expected, and not to arrive.  i am not expected at the bachelors’, so i
shall certainly go there.  well, i will make her stand by her husband.
that is the only thing for her to do.  that is the only thing for any
woman to do.  it is the growth of the moral sense in women that makes
marriage such a hopeless, one-sided institution.  ten o’clock.  she
should be here soon.  i must tell phipps i am not in to any one else.
[_goes towards bell_]

[_enter_ phipps.]

phipps.  lord caversham.

lord goring.  oh, why will parents always appear at the wrong time?  some
extraordinary mistake in nature, i suppose.  [_enter_ lord caversham.]
delighted to see you, my dear father.  [_goes to meet him_.]

lord caversham.  take my cloak off.

lord goring.  is it worth while, father?

lord caversham.  of course it is worth while, sir.  which is the most
comfortable chair?

lord goring.  this one, father.  it is the chair i use myself, when i
have visitors.

lord caversham.  thank ye.  no draught, i hope, in this room?

lord goring.  no, father.

lord caversham.  [_sitting down_.]  glad to hear it.  can’t stand
draughts.  no draughts at home.

lord goring.  good many breezes, father.

lord caversham.  eh?  eh?  don’t understand what you mean.  want to have
a serious conversation with you, sir.

lord goring.  my dear father!  at this hour?

lord caversham.  well, sir, it is only ten o’clock.  what is your
objection to the hour?  i think the hour is an admirable hour!

lord goring.  well, the fact is, father, this is not my day for talking
seriously.  i am very sorry, but it is not my day.

lord caversham.  what do you mean, sir?

lord goring.  during the season, father, i only talk seriously on the
first tuesday in every month, from four to seven.

lord caversham.  well, make it tuesday, sir, make it tuesday.

lord goring.  but it is after seven, father, and my doctor says i must
not have any serious conversation after seven.  it makes me talk in my
sleep.

lord caversham.  talk in your sleep, sir?  what does that matter?  you
are not married.

lord goring.  no, father, i am not married.

lord caversham.  hum!  that is what i have come to talk to you about,
sir.  you have got to get married, and at once.  why, when i was your
age, sir, i had been an inconsolable widower for three months, and was
already paying my addresses to your admirable mother.  damme, sir, it is
your duty to get married.  you can’t be always living for pleasure.
every man of position is married nowadays.  bachelors are not fashionable
any more.  they are a damaged lot.  too much is known about them.  you
must get a wife, sir.  look where your friend robert chiltern has got to
by probity, hard work, and a sensible marriage with a good woman.  why
don’t you imitate him, sir?  why don’t you take him for your model?

lord goring.  i think i shall, father.

lord caversham.  i wish you would, sir.  then i should be happy.  at
present i make your mother’s life miserable on your account.  you are
heartless, sir, quite heartless.

lord goring.  i hope not, father.

lord caversham.  and it is high time for you to get married.  you are
thirty-four years of age, sir.

lord goring.  yes, father, but i only admit to thirty-two—thirty-one and
a half when i have a really good buttonhole.  this buttonhole is not . . .
trivial enough.

lord caversham.  i tell you you are thirty-four, sir.  and there is a
draught in your room, besides, which makes your conduct worse.  why did
you tell me there was no draught, sir?  i feel a draught, sir, i feel it
distinctly.

lord goring.  so do i, father.  it is a dreadful draught.  i will come
and see you to-morrow, father.  we can talk over anything you like.  let
me help you on with your cloak, father.

lord caversham.  no, sir; i have called this evening for a definite
purpose, and i am going to see it through at all costs to my health or
yours.  put down my cloak, sir.

lord goring.  certainly, father.  but let us go into another room.
[_rings bell_.]  there is a dreadful draught here.  [_enter_ phipps.]
phipps, is there a good fire in the smoking-room?

phipps.  yes, my lord.

lord goring.  come in there, father.  your sneezes are quite
heartrending.

lord caversham.  well, sir, i suppose i have a right to sneeze when i
choose?

lord goring.  [_apologetically_.]  quite so, father.  i was merely
expressing sympathy.

lord caversham.  oh, damn sympathy.  there is a great deal too much of
that sort of thing going on nowadays.

lord goring.  i quite agree with you, father.  if there was less sympathy
in the world there would be less trouble in the world.

lord caversham.  [_going towards the smoking-room_.]  that is a paradox,
sir.  i hate paradoxes.

lord goring.  so do i, father.  everybody one meets is a paradox
nowadays.  it is a great bore.  it makes society so obvious.

lord caversham.  [_turning round_, _and looking at his son beneath his
bushy eyebrows_.]  do you always really understand what you say, sir?

lord goring.  [_after some hesitation_.]  yes, father, if i listen
attentively.

lord caversham.  [_indignantly_.]  if you listen attentively! . . .
conceited young puppy!

[_goes off grumbling into the smoking-room_.  phipps _enters_.]

lord goring.  phipps, there is a lady coming to see me this evening on
particular business.  show her into the drawing-room when she arrives.
you understand?

phipps.  yes, my lord.

lord goring.  it is a matter of the gravest importance, phipps.

phipps.  i understand, my lord.

lord goring.  no one else is to be admitted, under any circumstances.

phipps.  i understand, my lord.  [_bell rings_.]

lord goring.  ah! that is probably the lady.  i shall see her myself.

[_just as he is going towards the door_ lord caversham _enters from the
smoking-room_.]

lord caversham.  well, sir? am i to wait attendance on you?

lord goring.  [_considerably perplexed_.]  in a moment, father.  do
excuse me.  [lord caversham _goes back_.]  well, remember my
instructions, phipps—into that room.

phipps.  yes, my lord.

[lord goring _goes into the smoking-room_.  harold, _the footman shows_
mrs. cheveley _in_.  _lamia-like_, _she is in green and silver_.  _she
has a cloak of black satin_, _lined with dead rose-leaf silk_.]

harold.  what name, madam?

mrs. cheveley.  [_to_ phipps, _who advances towards her_.]  is lord
goring not here?  i was told he was at home?

phipps.  his lordship is engaged at present with lord caversham, madam.

[_turns a cold_, _glassy eye on_ harold, _who at once retires_.]

mrs. cheveley.  [_to herself_.]  how very filial!

phipps.  his lordship told me to ask you, madam, to be kind enough to
wait in the drawing-room for him.  his lordship will come to you there.

mrs. cheveley.  [_with a look of surprise_.]  lord goring expects me?

phipps.  yes, madam.

mrs. cheveley.  are you quite sure?

phipps.  his lordship told me that if a lady called i was to ask her to
wait in the drawing-room.  [_goes to the door of the drawing-room and
opens it_.]  his lordship’s directions on the subject were very precise.

mrs. cheveley.  [_to herself_]  how thoughtful of him!  to expect the
unexpected shows a thoroughly modern intellect.  [_goes towards the
drawing-room and looks in_.]  ugh!  how dreary a bachelor’s drawing-room
always looks.  i shall have to alter all this.  [phipps _brings the lamp
from the writing-table_.]  no, i don’t care for that lamp.  it is far too
glaring.  light some candles.

phipps.  [_replaces lamp_.]  certainly, madam.

mrs. cheveley.  i hope the candles have very becoming shades.

phipps.  we have had no complaints about them, madam, as yet.

[_passes into the drawing-room and begins to light the candles_.]

mrs. cheveley.  [_to herself_.]  i wonder what woman he is waiting for
to-night.  it will be delightful to catch him.  men always look so silly
when they are caught.  and they are always being caught.  [_looks about
room and approaches the writing-table_.]  what a very interesting room!
what a very interesting picture!  wonder what his correspondence is like.
[_takes up letters_.]  oh, what a very uninteresting correspondence!
bills and cards, debts and dowagers!  who on earth writes to him on pink
paper?  how silly to write on pink paper!  it looks like the beginning of
a middle-class romance.  romance should never begin with sentiment.  it
should begin with science and end with a settlement.  [_puts letter
down_, _then takes it up again_.]  i know that handwriting.  that is
gertrude chiltern’s.  i remember it perfectly.  the ten commandments in
every stroke of the pen, and the moral law all over the page.  wonder
what gertrude is writing to him about?  something horrid about me, i
suppose.  how i detest that woman!  [_reads it_.]  ‘i trust you.  i want
you.  i am coming to you.  gertrude.’  ‘i trust you.  i want you.  i am
coming to you.’

[_a look of triumph comes over her face_.  _she is just about to steal
the letter_, _when_ phipps _comes in_.]

phipps.  the candles in the drawing-room are lit, madam, as you directed.

mrs. cheveley.  thank you.  [_rises hastily and slips the letter under a
large silver-cased blotting-book that is lying on the table_.]

phipps.  i trust the shades will be to your liking, madam.  they are the
most becoming we have.  they are the same as his lordship uses himself
when he is dressing for dinner.

mrs. cheveley.  [_with a smile_.]  then i am sure they will be perfectly
right.

phipps.  [_gravely_.]  thank you, madam.

[mrs. cheveley _goes into the drawing-room_.  phipps _closes the door and
retires_.  _the door is then slowly opened_, _and_ mrs. cheveley _comes
out and creeps stealthily towards the writing-table_.  _suddenly voices
are heard from the smoking-room_.  mrs. cheveley _grows pale_, _and
stops_.  _the voices grow louder_, _and she goes back into the
drawing-room_, _biting her lip_.]

[_enter_ lord goring _and_ lord caversham.]

lord goring.  [_expostulating_.]  my dear father, if i am to get married,
surely you will allow me to choose the time, place, and person?
particularly the person.

lord caversham.  [_testily_.]  that is a matter for me, sir.  you would
probably make a very poor choice.  it is i who should be consulted, not
you.  there is property at stake.  it is not a matter for affection.
affection comes later on in married life.

lord goring.  yes.  in married life affection comes when people
thoroughly dislike each other, father, doesn’t it?  [_puts on_ lord
caversham’s _cloak for him_.]

lord caversham.  certainly, sir.  i mean certainly not, air.  you are
talking very foolishly to-night.  what i say is that marriage is a matter
for common sense.

lord goring.  but women who have common sense are so curiously plain,
father, aren’t they?  of course i only speak from hearsay.

lord caversham.  no woman, plain or pretty, has any common sense at all,
sir.  common sense is the privilege of our sex.

lord goring.  quite so.  and we men are so self-sacrificing that we never
use it, do we, father?

lord caversham.  i use it, sir.  i use nothing else.

lord goring.  so my mother tells me.

lord caversham.  it is the secret of your mother’s happiness.  you are
very heartless, sir, very heartless.

lord goring.  i hope not, father.

[_goes out for a moment_.  _then returns_, _looking rather put out_,
_with_ sir robert chiltern.]

sir robert chiltern.  my dear arthur, what a piece of good luck meeting
you on the doorstep!  your servant had just told me you were not at home.
how extraordinary!

lord goring.  the fact is, i am horribly busy to-night, robert, and i
gave orders i was not at home to any one.  even my father had a
comparatively cold reception.  he complained of a draught the whole time.

sir robert chiltern.  ah! you must be at home to me, arthur.  you are my
best friend.  perhaps by to-morrow you will be my only friend.  my wife
has discovered everything.

lord goring.  ah! i guessed as much!

sir robert chiltern.  [_looking at him_.]  really!  how?

lord goring.  [_after some hesitation_.]  oh, merely by something in the
expression of your face as you came in.  who told her?

sir robert chiltern.  mrs. cheveley herself.  and the woman i love knows
that i began my career with an act of low dishonesty, that i built up my
life upon sands of shame—that i sold, like a common huckster, the secret
that had been intrusted to me as a man of honour.  i thank heaven poor
lord radley died without knowing that i betrayed him.  i would to god i
had died before i had been so horribly tempted, or had fallen so low.
[_burying his face in his hands_.]

lord goring.  [_after a pause_.]  you have heard nothing from vienna yet,
in answer to your wire?

sir robert chiltern.  [_looking up_.]  yes; i got a telegram from the
first secretary at eight o’clock to-night.

lord goring.  well?

sir robert chiltern.  nothing is absolutely known against her.  on the
contrary, she occupies a rather high position in society.  it is a sort
of open secret that baron arnheim left her the greater portion of his
immense fortune.  beyond that i can learn nothing.

lord goring.  she doesn’t turn out to be a spy, then?

sir robert chiltern.  oh! spies are of no use nowadays.  their profession
is over.  the newspapers do their work instead.

lord goring.  and thunderingly well they do it.

sir robert chiltern.  arthur, i am parched with thirst.  may i ring for
something?  some hock and seltzer?

lord goring.  certainly.  let me.  [_rings the bell_.]

sir robert chiltern.  thanks!  i don’t know what to do, arthur, i don’t
know what to do, and you are my only friend.  but what a friend you
are—the one friend i can trust.  i can trust you absolutely, can’t i?

[_enter_ phipps.]

lord goring.  my dear robert, of course.  oh!  [_to_ phipps.]  bring some
hock and seltzer.

phipps.  yes, my lord.

lord goring.  and phipps!

phipps.  yes, my lord.

lord goring.  will you excuse me for a moment, robert?  i want to give
some directions to my servant.

sir robert chiltern.  certainly.

lord goring.  when that lady calls, tell her that i am not expected home
this evening.  tell her that i have been suddenly called out of town.
you understand?

phipps.  the lady is in that room, my lord.  you told me to show her into
that room, my lord.

lord goring.  you did perfectly right.  [_exit_ phipps.]  what a mess i
am in.  no; i think i shall get through it.  i’ll give her a lecture
through the door.  awkward thing to manage, though.

sir robert chiltern.  arthur, tell me what i should do.  my life seems to
have crumbled about me.  i am a ship without a rudder in a night without
a star.

lord goring.  robert, you love your wife, don’t you?

sir robert chiltern.  i love her more than anything in the world.  i used
to think ambition the great thing.  it is not.  love is the great thing
in the world.  there is nothing but love, and i love her.  but i am
defamed in her eyes.  i am ignoble in her eyes.  there is a wide gulf
between us now.  she has found me out, arthur, she has found me out.

lord goring.  has she never in her life done some folly—some
indiscretion—that she should not forgive your sin?

sir robert chiltern.  my wife!  never!  she does not know what weakness
or temptation is.  i am of clay like other men.  she stands apart as good
women do—pitiless in her perfection—cold and stern and without mercy.
but i love her, arthur.  we are childless, and i have no one else to
love, no one else to love me.  perhaps if god had sent us children she
might have been kinder to me.  but god has given us a lonely house.  and
she has cut my heart in two.  don’t let us talk of it.  i was brutal to
her this evening.  but i suppose when sinners talk to saints they are
brutal always.  i said to her things that were hideously true, on my
side, from my stand-point, from the standpoint of men.  but don’t let us
talk of that.

lord goring.  your wife will forgive you.  perhaps at this moment she is
forgiving you.  she loves you, robert.  why should she not forgive?

sir robert chiltern.  god grant it!  god grant it!  [_buries his face in
his hands_.]  but there is something more i have to tell you, arthur.

[_enter_ phipps _with drinks_.]

phipps.  [_hands hock and seltzer to_ sir robert chiltern.]  hock and
seltzer, sir.

sir robert chiltern.  thank you.

lord goring.  is your carriage here, robert?

sir robert chiltern.  no; i walked from the club.

lord goring.  sir robert will take my cab, phipps.

phipps.  yes, my lord.  [_exit_.]

lord goring.  robert, you don’t mind my sending you away?

sir robert chiltern.  arthur, you must let me stay for five minutes.  i
have made up my mind what i am going to do to-night in the house.  the
debate on the argentine canal is to begin at eleven.  [_a chair falls in
the drawing-room_.]  what is that?

lord goring.  nothing.

sir robert chiltern.  i heard a chair fall in the next room.  some one
has been listening.

lord goring.  no, no; there is no one there.

sir robert chiltern.  there is some one.  there are lights in the room,
and the door is ajar.  some one has been listening to every secret of my
life.  arthur, what does this mean?

lord goring.  robert, you are excited, unnerved.  i tell you there is no
one in that room. sit down, robert.

sir robert chiltern.  do you give me your word that there is no one
there?

lord goring.  yes.

sir robert chiltern.  your word of honour?  [_sits down_.]

lord goring.  yes.

sir robert chiltern.  [_rises_.]  arthur, let me see for myself.

lord goring.  no, no.

sir robert chiltern.  if there is no one there why should i not look in
that room?  arthur, you must let me go into that room and satisfy myself.
let me know that no eavesdropper has heard my life’s secret.  arthur, you
don’t realise what i am going through.

lord goring.  robert, this must stop.  i have told you that there is no
one in that room—that is enough.

sir robert chiltern.  [_rushes to the door of the room_.]  it is not
enough.  i insist on going into this room.  you have told me there is no
one there, so what reason can you have for refusing me?

lord goring.  for god’s sake, don’t!  there is some one there.  some one
whom you must not see.

sir robert chiltern.  ah, i thought so!

lord goring.  i forbid you to enter that room.

sir robert chiltern.  stand back.  my life is at stake.  and i don’t care
who is there.  i will know who it is to whom i have told my secret and my
shame.  [_enters room_.]

lord goring.  great heavens! his own wife!

[sir robert chiltern _comes back_, _with a look of scorn and anger on his
face_.]

sir robert chiltern.  what explanation have you to give me for the
presence of that woman here?

lord goring.  robert, i swear to you on my honour that that lady is
stainless and guiltless of all offence towards you.

sir robert chiltern.  she is a vile, an infamous thing!

lord goring.  don’t say that, robert!  it was for your sake she came
here.  it was to try and save you she came here.  she loves you and no
one else.

sir robert chiltern.  you are mad.  what have i to do with her intrigues
with you?  let her remain your mistress!  you are well suited to each
other.  she, corrupt and shameful—you, false as a friend, treacherous as
an enemy even—

lord goring.  it is not true, robert.  before heaven, it is not true.  in
her presence and in yours i will explain all.

sir robert chiltern.  let me pass, sir.  you have lied enough upon your
word of honour.

[sir robert chiltern _goes out_.  lord goring _rushes to the door of the
drawing-room_, _when_ mrs. cheveley _comes out_, _looking radiant and
much amused_.]

mrs. cheveley.  [_with a mock curtsey_]  good evening, lord goring!

lord goring.  mrs. cheveley!  great heavens! . . . may i ask what you
were doing in my drawing-room?

mrs. cheveley.  merely listening.  i have a perfect passion for listening
through keyholes.  one always hears such wonderful things through them.

lord goring.  doesn’t that sound rather like tempting providence?

mrs. cheveley.  oh! surely providence can resist temptation by this time.
[_makes a sign to him to take her cloak off_, _which he does_.]

lord goring.  i am glad you have called.  i am going to give you some
good advice.

mrs. cheveley.  oh! pray don’t.  one should never give a woman anything
that she can’t wear in the evening.

lord goring.  i see you are quite as wilful as you used to be.

mrs. cheveley.  far more!  i have greatly improved.  i have had more
experience.

lord goring.  too much experience is a dangerous thing.  pray have a
cigarette.  half the pretty women in london smoke cigarettes.  personally
i prefer the other half.

mrs. cheveley.  thanks.  i never smoke.  my dressmaker wouldn’t like it,
and a woman’s first duty in life is to her dressmaker, isn’t it?  what
the second duty is, no one has as yet discovered.

lord goring.  you have come here to sell me robert chiltern’s letter,
haven’t you?

mrs. cheveley.  to offer it to you on conditions.  how did you guess
that?

lord goring.  because you haven’t mentioned the subject.  have you got it
with you?

mrs. cheveley.  [_sitting down_.]  oh, no!  a well-made dress has no
pockets.

lord goring.  what is your price for it?

mrs. cheveley.  how absurdly english you are!  the english think that a
cheque-book can solve every problem in life.  why, my dear arthur, i have
very much more money than you have, and quite as much as robert chiltern
has got hold of.  money is not what i want.

lord goring.  what do you want then, mrs. cheveley?

mrs. cheveley.  why don’t you call me laura?

lord goring.  i don’t like the name.

mrs. cheveley.  you used to adore it.

lord goring.  yes: that’s why.  [mrs. cheveley _motions to him to sit
down beside her_.  _he smiles_, _and does so_.]

mrs. cheveley.  arthur, you loved me once.

lord goring.  yes.

mrs. cheveley.  and you asked me to be your wife.

lord goring.  that was the natural result of my loving you.

mrs. cheveley.  and you threw me over because you saw, or said you saw,
poor old lord mortlake trying to have a violent flirtation with me in the
conservatory at tenby.

lord goring.  i am under the impression that my lawyer settled that
matter with you on certain terms . . . dictated by yourself.

mrs. cheveley.  at that time i was poor; you were rich.

lord goring.  quite so.  that is why you pretended to love me.

mrs. cheveley.  [_shrugging her shoulders_.]  poor old lord mortlake, who
had only two topics of conversation, his gout and his wife!  i never
could quite make out which of the two he was talking about.  he used the
most horrible language about them both.  well, you were silly, arthur.
why, lord mortlake was never anything more to me than an amusement.  one
of those utterly tedious amusements one only finds at an english country
house on an english country sunday.  i don’t think any one at all morally
responsible for what he or she does at an english country house.

lord goring.  yes.  i know lots of people think that.

mrs. cheveley.  i loved you, arthur.

lord goring.  my dear mrs. cheveley, you have always been far too clever
to know anything about love.

mrs. cheveley.  i did love you.  and you loved me.  you know you loved
me; and love is a very wonderful thing.  i suppose that when a man has
once loved a woman, he will do anything for her, except continue to love
her?  [_puts her hand on his_.]

lord goring.  [_taking his hand away quietly_.]  yes: except that.

mrs. cheveley.  [_after a pause_.]  i am tired of living abroad.  i want
to come back to london.  i want to have a charming house here.  i want to
have a salon.  if one could only teach the english how to talk, and the
irish how to listen, society here would be quite civilised.  besides, i
have arrived at the romantic stage.  when i saw you last night at the
chilterns’, i knew you were the only person i had ever cared for, if i
ever have cared for anybody, arthur.  and so, on the morning of the day
you marry me, i will give you robert chiltern’s letter.  that is my
offer.  i will give it to you now, if you promise to marry me.

lord goring.  now?

mrs. cheveley.  [_smiling_.]  to-morrow.

lord goring.  are you really serious?

mrs. cheveley.  yes, quite serious.

lord goring.  i should make you a very bad husband.

mrs. cheveley.  i don’t mind bad husbands.  i have had two.  they amused
me immensely.

lord goring.  you mean that you amused yourself immensely, don’t you?

mrs. cheveley.  what do you know about my married life?

lord goring.  nothing: but i can read it like a book.

mrs. cheveley.  what book?

lord goring.  [_rising_.]  the book of numbers.

mrs. cheveley.  do you think it is quite charming of you to be so rude to
a woman in your own house?

lord goring.  in the case of very fascinating women, sex is a challenge,
not a defence.

mrs. cheveley.  i suppose that is meant for a compliment.  my dear
arthur, women are never disarmed by compliments.  men always are.  that
is the difference between the two sexes.

lord goring.  women are never disarmed by anything, as far as i know
them.

mrs. cheveley.  [_after a pause_.]  then you are going to allow your
greatest friend, robert chiltern, to be ruined, rather than marry some
one who really has considerable attractions left.  i thought you would
have risen to some great height of self-sacrifice, arthur.  i think you
should.  and the rest of your life you could spend in contemplating your
own perfections.

lord goring.  oh! i do that as it is.  and self-sacrifice is a thing that
should be put down by law.  it is so demoralising to the people for whom
one sacrifices oneself.  they always go to the bad.

mrs. cheveley.  as if anything could demoralise robert chiltern!  you
seem to forget that i know his real character.

lord goring.  what you know about him is not his real character.  it was
an act of folly done in his youth, dishonourable, i admit, shameful, i
admit, unworthy of him, i admit, and therefore . . . not his true
character.

mrs. cheveley.  how you men stand up for each other!

lord goring.  how you women war against each other!

mrs. cheveley.  [_bitterly_.]  i only war against one woman, against
gertrude chiltern.  i hate her.  i hate her now more than ever.

lord goring.  because you have brought a real tragedy into her life, i
suppose.

mrs. cheveley.  [_with a sneer_.]  oh, there is only one real tragedy in
a woman’s life.  the fact that her past is always her lover, and her
future invariably her husband.

lord goring.  lady chiltern knows nothing of the kind of life to which
you are alluding.

mrs. cheveley.  a woman whose size in gloves is seven and three-quarters
never knows much about anything.  you know gertrude has always worn seven
and three-quarters?  that is one of the reasons why there was never any
moral sympathy between us. . . . well, arthur, i suppose this romantic
interview may be regarded as at an end.  you admit it was romantic, don’t
you?  for the privilege of being your wife i was ready to surrender a
great prize, the climax of my diplomatic career.  you decline.  very
well.  if sir robert doesn’t uphold my argentine scheme, i expose him.
voilà tout.

lord goring.  you mustn’t do that.  it would be vile, horrible, infamous.

mrs. cheveley.  [_shrugging her shoulders_.]  oh! don’t use big words.
they mean so little.  it is a commercial transaction.  that is all.
there is no good mixing up sentimentality in it.  i offered to sell
robert chiltern a certain thing.  if he won’t pay me my price, he will
have to pay the world a greater price.  there is no more to be said.  i
must go.  good-bye.  won’t you shake hands?

lord goring.  with you?  no.  your transaction with robert chiltern may
pass as a loathsome commercial transaction of a loathsome commercial age;
but you seem to have forgotten that you came here to-night to talk of
love, you whose lips desecrated the word love, you to whom the thing is a
book closely sealed, went this afternoon to the house of one of the most
noble and gentle women in the world to degrade her husband in her eyes,
to try and kill her love for him, to put poison in her heart, and
bitterness in her life, to break her idol, and, it may be, spoil her
soul.  that i cannot forgive you.  that was horrible.  for that there can
be no forgiveness.

mrs. cheveley.  arthur, you are unjust to me.  believe me, you are quite
unjust to me.  i didn’t go to taunt gertrude at all.  i had no idea of
doing anything of the kind when i entered.  i called with lady markby
simply to ask whether an ornament, a jewel, that i lost somewhere last
night, had been found at the chilterns’.  if you don’t believe me, you
can ask lady markby.  she will tell you it is true.  the scene that
occurred happened after lady markby had left, and was really forced on me
by gertrude’s rudeness and sneers.  i called, oh!—a little out of malice
if you like—but really to ask if a diamond brooch of mine had been found.
that was the origin of the whole thing.

lord goring.  a diamond snake-brooch with a ruby?

mrs. cheveley.  yes.  how do you know?

lord goring.  because it is found.  in point of fact, i found it myself,
and stupidly forgot to tell the butler anything about it as i was
leaving.  [_goes over to the writing-table and pulls out the drawers_.]
it is in this drawer.  no, that one.  this is the brooch, isn’t it?
[_holds up the brooch_.]

mrs. cheveley.  yes.  i am so glad to get it back.  it was . . a present.

lord goring.  won’t you wear it?

mrs. cheveley.  certainly, if you pin it in.  [lord goring _suddenly
clasps it on her arm_.]  why do you put it on as a bracelet?  i never
knew it could he worn as a bracelet.

lord goring.  really?

mrs. cheveley.  [_holding out her handsome arm_.]  no; but it looks very
well on me as a bracelet, doesn’t it?

lord goring.  yes; much better than when i saw it last.

mrs. cheveley.  when did you see it last?

lord goring.  [_calmly_.]  oh, ten years ago, on lady berkshire, from
whom you stole it.

mrs. cheveley.  [_starting_.]  what do you mean?

lord goring.  i mean that you stole that ornament from my cousin, mary
berkshire, to whom i gave it when she was married.  suspicion fell on a
wretched servant, who was sent away in disgrace.  i recognised it last
night.  i determined to say nothing about it till i had found the thief.
i have found the thief now, and i have heard her own confession.

mrs. cheveley.  [_tossing her head_.]  it is not true.

lord goring.  you know it is true.  why, thief is written across your
face at this moment.

mrs. cheveley.  i will deny the whole affair from beginning to end.  i
will say that i have never seen this wretched thing, that it was never in
my possession.

[mrs. cheveley _tries to get the bracelet off her arm_, _but fails_.
lord goring _looks on amused_.  _her thin fingers tear at the jewel to no
purpose_.  _a curse breaks from her_.]

lord goring.  the drawback of stealing a thing, mrs. cheveley, is that
one never knows how wonderful the thing that one steals is.  you can’t
get that bracelet off, unless you know where the spring is.  and i see
you don’t know where the spring is.  it is rather difficult to find.

mrs. cheveley.  you brute!  you coward!  [_she tries again to unclasp the
bracelet_, _but fails_.]

lord goring.  oh! don’t use big words.  they mean so little.

mrs. cheveley.  [_again tears at the bracelet in a paroxysm of rage_,
_with inarticulate sounds_.  _then stops_, _and looks at_ lord goring.]
what are you going to do?

lord goring.  i am going to ring for my servant.  he is an admirable
servant.  always comes in the moment one rings for him.  when he comes i
will tell him to fetch the police.

mrs. cheveley.  [_trembling_.]  the police?  what for?

lord goring.  to-morrow the berkshires will prosecute you.  that is what
the police are for.

mrs. cheveley.  [_is now in an agony of physical terror_.  _her face is
distorted_.  _her mouth awry_.  _a mask has fallen from her_.  _she it_,
_for the moment_, _dreadful to look at_.]  don’t do that.  i will do
anything you want.  anything in the world you want.

lord goring.  give me robert chiltern’s letter.

mrs. cheveley.  stop! stop!  let me have time to think.

lord goring.  give me robert chiltern’s letter.

mrs. cheveley.  i have not got it with me.  i will give it to you
to-morrow.

lord goring.  you know you are lying.  give it to me at once.  [mrs.
cheveley _pulls the letter out_, _and hands it to him_.  _she is horribly
pale_.]  this is it?

mrs. cheveley.  [_in a hoarse voice_.]  yes.

lord goring.  [_takes the letter_, _examines it_, _sighs_, _and burns it
with the lamp_.]  for so well-dressed a woman, mrs. cheveley, you have
moments of admirable common sense.  i congratulate you.

mrs. cheveley.  [_catches sight of_ lady chiltern’s _letter_, _the cover
of which is just showing from under the blotting-book_.]  please get me a
glass of water.

lord goring.  certainly.  [_goes to the corner of the room and pours out
a glass of water_.  _while his back is turned_ mrs. cheveley _steals_
lady chiltern’s _letter_.  _when_ lord goring _returns the glass she
refuses it with a gesture_.]

mrs. cheveley.  thank you.  will you help me on with my cloak?

lord goring.  with pleasure.  [_puts her cloak on_.]

mrs. cheveley.  thanks.  i am never going to try to harm robert chiltern
again.

lord goring.  fortunately you have not the chance, mrs. cheveley.

mrs. cheveley.  well, if even i had the chance, i wouldn’t.  on the
contrary, i am going to render him a great service.

lord goring.  i am charmed to hear it.  it is a reformation.

mrs. cheveley.  yes.  i can’t bear so upright a gentleman, so honourable
an english gentleman, being so shamefully deceived, and so—

lord goring.  well?

mrs. cheveley.  i find that somehow gertrude chiltern’s dying speech and
confession has strayed into my pocket.

lord goring.  what do you mean?

mrs. cheveley.  [_with a bitter note of triumph in her voice_.]  i mean
that i am going to send robert chiltern the love-letter his wife wrote to
you to-night.

lord goring.  love-letter?

mrs. cheveley.  [_laughing_.]  ‘i want you.  i trust you.  i am coming to
you.  gertrude.’

[lord goring _rushes to the bureau and takes up the envelope_, _finds is
empty_, _and turns round_.]

lord goring.  you wretched woman, must you always be thieving?  give me
back that letter.  i’ll take it from you by force.  you shall not leave
my room till i have got it.

[_he rushes towards her_, _but_ mrs. cheveley _at once puts her hand on
the electric bell that is on the table_. _the bell sounds with shrill
reverberations_, _and_ phipps _enters_.]

mrs. cheveley.  [_after a pause_.]  lord goring merely rang that you
should show me out.  good-night, lord goring!

[_goes out followed by_ phipps.  _her face is illumined with evil
triumph_.  _there is joy in her eyes_.  _youth seems to have come back to
her_.  _her last glance is like a swift arrow_.  lord goring _bites his
lip_, _and lights his a cigarette_.]

                                act drops




fourth act


scene


_same as act ii_.

[lord goring _is standing by the fireplace with his hands in his
pockets_.  _he is looking rather bored_.]

lord goring.  [_pulls out his watch_, _inspects it_, _and rings the
bell_.]  it is a great nuisance.  i can’t find any one in this house to
talk to.  and i am full of interesting information.  i feel like the
latest edition of something or other.

[_enter servant_.]

james.  sir robert is still at the foreign office, my lord.

lord goring.  lady chiltern not down yet?

james.  her ladyship has not yet left her room.  miss chiltern has just
come in from riding.

lord goring.  [_to himself_.]  ah! that is something.

james.  lord caversham has been waiting some time in the library for sir
robert.  i told him your lordship was here.

lord goring.  thank you!  would you kindly tell him i’ve gone?

james.  [_bowing_.]  i shall do so, my lord.

[_exit servant_.]

lord goring.  really, i don’t want to meet my father three days running.
it is a great deal too much excitement for any son.  i hope to goodness
he won’t come up.  fathers should be neither seen nor heard.  that is the
only proper basis for family life.  mothers are different.  mothers are
darlings.  [_throws himself down into a chair_, _picks up a paper and
begins to read it_.]

[_enter_ lord caversham.]

lord caversham.  well, sir, what are you doing here?  wasting your time
as usual, i suppose?

lord goring.  [_throws down paper and rises_.]  my dear father, when one
pays a visit it is for the purpose of wasting other people’s time, not
one’s own.

lord caversham.  have you been thinking over what i spoke to you about
last night?

lord goring.  i have been thinking about nothing else.

lord caversham.  engaged to be married yet?

lord goring.  [_genially_.]  not yet: but i hope to be before lunch-time.

lord caversham.  [_caustically_.]  you can have till dinner-time if it
would be of any convenience to you.

lord goring.  thanks awfully, but i think i’d sooner be engaged before
lunch.

lord caversham.  humph!  never know when you are serious or not.

lord goring.  neither do i, father.

[_a pause_.]

lord caversham.  i suppose you have read _the times_ this morning?

lord goring.  [_airily_.]  the times?  certainly not.  i only read _the
morning post_.  all that one should know about modern life is where the
duchesses are; anything else is quite demoralising.

lord caversham.  do you mean to say you have not read _the times_ leading
article on robert chiltern’s career?

lord goring.  good heavens!  no.  what does it say?

lord caversham.  what should it say, sir?  everything complimentary, of
course.  chiltern’s speech last night on this argentine canal scheme was
one of the finest pieces of oratory ever delivered in the house since
canning.

lord goring.  ah!  never heard of canning.  never wanted to.  and did . . .
did chiltern uphold the scheme?

lord caversham.  uphold it, sir?  how little you know him!  why, he
denounced it roundly, and the whole system of modern political finance.
this speech is the turning-point in his career, as _the times_ points
out.  you should read this article, sir.  [_opens_ the times.]  ‘sir
robert chiltern . . . most rising of our young statesmen . . . brilliant
orator . . . unblemished career . . . well-known integrity of character
. . . represents what is best in english public life . . . noble contrast
to the lax morality so common among foreign politicians.’  they will
never say that of you, sir.

lord goring.  i sincerely hope not, father.  however, i am delighted at
what you tell me about robert, thoroughly delighted.  it shows he has got
pluck.

lord caversham.  he has got more than pluck, sir, he has got genius.

lord goring.  ah! i prefer pluck.  it is not so common, nowadays, as
genius is.

lord caversham.  i wish you would go into parliament.

lord goring.  my dear father, only people who look dull ever get into the
house of commons, and only people who are dull ever succeed there.

lord caversham.  why don’t you try to do something useful in life?

lord goring.  i am far too young.

lord caversham.  [_testily_.]  i hate this affectation of youth, sir.  it
is a great deal too prevalent nowadays.

lord goring.  youth isn’t an affectation.  youth is an art.

lord caversham.  why don’t you propose to that pretty miss chiltern?

lord goring.  i am of a very nervous disposition, especially in the
morning.

lord caversham.  i don’t suppose there is the smallest chance of her
accepting you.

lord goring.  i don’t know how the betting stands to-day.

lord caversham.  if she did accept you she would be the prettiest fool in
england.

lord goring.  that is just what i should like to marry.  a thoroughly
sensible wife would reduce me to a condition of absolute idiocy in less
than six months.

lord caversham.  you don’t deserve her, sir.

lord goring.  my dear father, if we men married the women we deserved, we
should have a very bad time of it.

[_enter_ mabel chiltern.]

mabel chiltern.  oh! . . . how do you do, lord caversham?  i hope lady
caversham is quite well?

lord caversham.  lady caversham is as usual, as usual.

lord goring.  good morning, miss mabel!

mabel chiltern.  [_taking no notice at all of_ lord goring, _and
addressing herself exclusively to_ lord caversham.]  and lady caversham’s
bonnets . . . are they at all better?

lord caversham.  they have had a serious relapse, i am sorry to say.

lord goring.  good morning, miss mabel!

mabel chiltern.  [_to_ lord caversham.]  i hope an operation will not be
necessary.

lord caversham.  [_smiling at her pertness_.]  if it is, we shall have to
give lady caversham a narcotic.  otherwise she would never consent to
have a feather touched.

lord goring.  [_with increased emphasis_.]  good morning, miss mabel!

mabel chiltern.  [_turning round with feigned surprise_.]  oh, are you
here?  of course you understand that after your breaking your appointment
i am never going to speak to you again.

lord goring.  oh, please don’t say such a thing.  you are the one person
in london i really like to have to listen to me.

mabel chiltern.  lord goring, i never believe a single word that either
you or i say to each other.

lord caversham.  you are quite right, my dear, quite right . . . as far
as he is concerned, i mean.

mabel chiltern.  do you think you could possibly make your son behave a
little better occasionally?  just as a change.

lord caversham.  i regret to say, miss chiltern, that i have no influence
at all over my son.  i wish i had.  if i had, i know what i would make
him do.

mabel chiltern.  i am afraid that he has one of those terribly weak
natures that are not susceptible to influence.

lord caversham.  he is very heartless, very heartless.

lord goring.  it seems to me that i am a little in the way here.

mabel chiltern.  it is very good for you to be in the way, and to know
what people say of you behind your back.

lord goring.  i don’t at all like knowing what people say of me behind my
back.  it makes me far too conceited.

lord caversham.  after that, my dear, i really must bid you good morning.

mabel chiltern.  oh! i hope you are not going to leave me all alone with
lord goring?  especially at such an early hour in the day.

lord caversham.  i am afraid i can’t take him with me to downing street.
it is not the prime minster’s day for seeing the unemployed.

[_shakes hands with_ mabel chiltern, _takes up his hat and stick_, _and
goes out_, _with a parting glare of indignation at_ lord goring.]

mabel chiltern.  [_takes up roses and begins to arrange them in a bowl on
the table_.]  people who don’t keep their appointments in the park are
horrid.

lord goring.  detestable.

mabel chiltern.  i am glad you admit it.  but i wish you wouldn’t look so
pleased about it.

lord goring.  i can’t help it.  i always look pleased when i am with you.

mabel chiltern.  [_sadly_.]  then i suppose it is my duty to remain with
you?

lord goring.  of course it is.

mabel chiltern.  well, my duty is a thing i never do, on principle.  it
always depresses me.  so i am afraid i must leave you.

lord goring.  please don’t, miss mabel.  i have something very particular
to say to you.

mabel chiltern.  [_rapturously_.]  oh! is it a proposal?

lord goring.  [_somewhat taken aback_.]  well, yes, it is—i am bound to
say it is.

mabel chiltern.  [_with a sigh of pleasure_.]  i am so glad.  that makes
the second to-day.

lord goring.  [_indignantly_.]  the second to-day?  what conceited ass
has been impertinent enough to dare to propose to you before i had
proposed to you?

mabel chiltern.  tommy trafford, of course.  it is one of tommy’s days
for proposing.  he always proposes on tuesdays and thursdays, during the
season.

lord goring.  you didn’t accept him, i hope?

mabel chiltern.  i make it a rule never to accept tommy.  that is why he
goes on proposing.  of course, as you didn’t turn up this morning, i very
nearly said yes.  it would have been an excellent lesson both for him and
for you if i had.  it would have taught you both better manners.

lord goring.  oh! bother tommy trafford.  tommy is a silly little ass.  i
love you.

mabel chiltern.  i know.  and i think you might have mentioned it before.
i am sure i have given you heaps of opportunities.

lord goring.  mabel, do be serious.  please be serious.

mabel chiltern.  ah! that is the sort of thing a man always says to a
girl before he has been married to her.  he never says it afterwards.

lord goring.  [_taking hold of her hand_.]  mabel, i have told you that i
love you.  can’t you love me a little in return?

mabel chiltern.  you silly arthur!  if you knew anything about . . .
anything, which you don’t, you would know that i adore you.  every one in
london knows it except you.  it is a public scandal the way i adore you.
i have been going about for the last six months telling the whole of
society that i adore you.  i wonder you consent to have anything to say
to me.  i have no character left at all.  at least, i feel so happy that
i am quite sure i have no character left at all.

lord goring.  [_catches her in his arms and kisses her_.  _then there is
a pause of bliss_.]  dear!  do you know i was awfully afraid of being
refused!

mabel chiltern.  [_looking up at him_.]  but you never have been refused
yet by anybody, have you, arthur?  i can’t imagine any one refusing you.

lord goring.  [_after kissing her again_.]  of course i’m not nearly good
enough for you, mabel.

mabel chiltern.  [_nestling close to him_.]  i am so glad, darling.  i
was afraid you were.

lord goring.  [_after some hesitation_.]  and i’m . . . i’m a little over
thirty.

mabel chiltern.  dear, you look weeks younger than that.

lord goring.  [_enthusiastically_.]  how sweet of you to say so! . . .
and it is only fair to tell you frankly that i am fearfully extravagant.

mabel chiltern.  but so am i, arthur.  so we’re sure to agree.  and now i
must go and see gertrude.

lord goring.  must you really?  [_kisses her_.]

mabel chiltern.  yes.

lord goring.  then do tell her i want to talk to her particularly.  i
have been waiting here all the morning to see either her or robert.

mabel chiltern.  do you mean to say you didn’t come here expressly to
propose to me?

lord goring.  [_triumphantly_.]  no; that was a flash of genius.

mabel chiltern.  your first.

lord goring.  [_with determination_.]  my last.

mabel chiltern.  i am delighted to hear it.  now don’t stir.  i’ll be
back in five minutes.  and don’t fall into any temptations while i am
away.

lord goring.  dear mabel, while you are away, there are none.  it makes
me horribly dependent on you.

[_enter_ lady chiltern.]

lady chiltern.  good morning, dear!  how pretty you are looking!

mabel chiltern.  how pale you are looking, gertrude!  it is most
becoming!

lady chiltern.  good morning, lord goring!

lord goring.  [_bowing_.]  good morning, lady chiltern!

mabel chiltern.  [_aside to_ lord goring.]  i shall be in the
conservatory under the second palm tree on the left.

lord goring.  second on the left?

mabel chiltern.  [_with a look of mock surprise_.]  yes; the usual palm
tree.

[_blows a kiss to him_, _unobserved by_ lady chiltern, _and goes out_.]

lord goring.  lady chiltern, i have a certain amount of very good news to
tell you.  mrs. cheveley gave me up robert’s letter last night, and i
burned it.  robert is safe.

lady chiltern.  [_sinking on the sofa_.]  safe!  oh! i am so glad of
that.  what a good friend you are to him—to us!

lord goring.  there is only one person now that could be said to be in
any danger.

lady chiltern.  who is that?

lord goring.  [_sitting down beside her_.]  yourself.

lady chiltern.  i?  in danger?  what do you mean?

lord goring.  danger is too great a word.  it is a word i should not have
used.  but i admit i have something to tell you that may distress you,
that terribly distresses me.  yesterday evening you wrote me a very
beautiful, womanly letter, asking me for my help.  you wrote to me as one
of your oldest friends, one of your husband’s oldest friends.  mrs.
cheveley stole that letter from my rooms.

lady chiltern.  well, what use is it to her?  why should she not have it?

lord goring.  [_rising_.]  lady chiltern, i will be quite frank with you.
mrs. cheveley puts a certain construction on that letter and proposes to
send it to your husband.

lady chiltern.  but what construction could she put on it? . . . oh! not
that! not that!  if i in—in trouble, and wanting your help, trusting you,
propose to come to you . . . that you may advise me . . . assist me . . .
oh! are there women so horrible as that . . .?  and she proposes to send
it to my husband?  tell me what happened.  tell me all that happened.

lord goring.  mrs. cheveley was concealed in a room adjoining my library,
without my knowledge.  i thought that the person who was waiting in that
room to see me was yourself.  robert came in unexpectedly.  a chair or
something fell in the room.  he forced his way in, and he discovered her.
we had a terrible scene.  i still thought it was you.  he left me in
anger.  at the end of everything mrs. cheveley got possession of your
letter—she stole it, when or how, i don’t know.

lady chiltern.  at what hour did this happen?

lord goring.  at half-past ten.  and now i propose that we tell robert
the whole thing at once.

lady chiltern.  [_looking at him with amazement that is almost terror_.]
you want me to tell robert that the woman you expected was not mrs.
cheveley, but myself?  that it was i whom you thought was concealed in a
room in your house, at half-past ten o’clock at night?  you want me to
tell him that?

lord goring.  i think it is better that he should know the exact truth.

lady chiltern.  [_rising_.]  oh, i couldn’t, i couldn’t!

lord goring.  may i do it?

lady chiltern.  no.

lord goring.  [_gravely_.]  you are wrong, lady chiltern.

lady chiltern.  no.  the letter must be intercepted.  that is all.  but
how can i do it?  letters arrive for him every moment of the day.  his
secretaries open them and hand them to him.  i dare not ask the servants
to bring me his letters.  it would be impossible.  oh! why don’t you tell
me what to do?

lord goring.  pray be calm, lady chiltern, and answer the questions i am
going to put to you.  you said his secretaries open his letters.

lady chiltern.  yes.

lord goring.  who is with him to-day?  mr. trafford, isn’t it?

lady chiltern.  no.  mr. montford, i think.

lord goring.  you can trust him?

lady chiltern.  [_with a gesture of despair_.]  oh! how do i know?

lord goring.  he would do what you asked him, wouldn’t he?

lady chiltern.  i think so.

lord goring.  your letter was on pink paper.  he could recognise it
without reading it, couldn’t he?  by the colour?

lady chiltern.  i suppose so.

lord goring.  is he in the house now?

lady chiltern.  yes.

lord goring.  then i will go and see him myself, and tell him that a
certain letter, written on pink paper, is to be forwarded to robert
to-day, and that at all costs it must not reach him.  [_goes to the
door_, _and opens it_.]  oh! robert is coming upstairs with the letter in
his hand.  it has reached him already.

lady chiltern.  [_with a cry of pain_.]  oh! you have saved his life;
what have you done with mine?

[_enter_ sir robert chiltern.  _he has the letter in his hand_, _and is
reading it_.  _he comes towards his wife_, _not noticing_ lord goring’s
_presence_.]

sir robert chiltern.  ‘i want you.  i trust you.  i am coming to you.
gertrude.’  oh, my love!  is this true?  do you indeed trust me, and want
me?  if so, it was for me to come to you, not for you to write of coming
to me.  this letter of yours, gertrude, makes me feel that nothing that
the world may do can hurt me now.  you want me, gertrude?

[lord goring, _unseen by_ sir robert chiltern, _makes an imploring sign
to_ lady chiltern _to accept the situation and_ sir robert’s _error_.]

lady chiltern.  yes.

sir robert chiltern.  you trust me, gertrude?

lady chiltern.  yes.

sir robert chiltern.  ah! why did you not add you loved me?

lady chiltern.  [_taking his hand_.]  because i loved you.

[lord goring _passes into the conservatory_.]

sir robert chiltern.  [_kisses her_.]  gertrude, you don’t know what i
feel.  when montford passed me your letter across the table—he had opened
it by mistake, i suppose, without looking at the handwriting on the
envelope—and i read it—oh! i did not care what disgrace or punishment was
in store for me, i only thought you loved me still.

lady chiltern.  there is no disgrace in store for you, nor any public
shame.  mrs. cheveley has handed over to lord goring the document that
was in her possession, and he has destroyed it.

sir robert chiltern.  are you sure of this, gertrude?

lady chiltern.  yes; lord goring has just told me.

sir robert chiltern.  then i am safe!  oh! what a wonderful thing to be
safe!  for two days i have been in terror.  i am safe now.  how did
arthur destroy my letter?  tell me.

lady chiltern.  he burned it.

sir robert chiltern.  i wish i had seen that one sin of my youth burning
to ashes.  how many men there are in modern life who would like to see
their past burning to white ashes before them!  is arthur still here?

lady chiltern.  yes; he is in the conservatory.

sir robert chiltern.  i am so glad now i made that speech last night in
the house, so glad.  i made it thinking that public disgrace might be the
result.  but it has not been so.

lady chiltern.  public honour has been the result.

sir robert chiltern.  i think so.  i fear so, almost.  for although i am
safe from detection, although every proof against me is destroyed, i
suppose, gertrude . . . i suppose i should retire from public life?  [_he
looks anxiously at his wife_.]

lady chiltern.  [_eagerly_.]  oh yes, robert, you should do that.  it is
your duty to do that.

sir robert chiltern.  it is much to surrender.

lady chiltern.  no; it will be much to gain.

[sir robert chiltern _walks up and down the room with a troubled
expression_.  _then comes over to his wife_, _and puts his hand on her
shoulder_.]

sir robert chiltern.  and you would be happy living somewhere alone with
me, abroad perhaps, or in the country away from london, away from public
life?  you would have no regrets?

lady chiltern.  oh! none, robert.

sir robert chiltern.  [_sadly_.]  and your ambition for me?  you used to
be ambitious for me.

lady chiltern.  oh, my ambition!  i have none now, but that we two may
love each other.  it was your ambition that led you astray.  let us not
talk about ambition.

[lord goring _returns from the conservatory_, _looking very pleased with
himself_, _and with an entirely new buttonhole that some one has made for
him_.]

sir robert chiltern.  [_going towards him_.]  arthur, i have to thank you
for what you have done for me.  i don’t know how i can repay you.
[_shakes hands with him_.]

lord goring.  my dear fellow, i’ll tell you at once.  at the present
moment, under the usual palm tree . . . i mean in the conservatory . . .

[_enter_ mason.]

mason.  lord caversham.

lord goring.  that admirable father of mine really makes a habit of
turning up at the wrong moment.  it is very heartless of him, very
heartless indeed.

[_enter_ lord caversham.  mason _goes out_.]

lord caversham.  good morning, lady chiltern!  warmest congratulations to
you, chiltern, on your brilliant speech last night.  i have just left the
prime minister, and you are to have the vacant seat in the cabinet.

sir robert chiltern.  [_with a look of joy and triumph_.]  a seat in the
cabinet?

lord caversham.  yes; here is the prime minister’s letter.  [_hands
letter_.]

sir robert chiltern.  [_takes letter and reads it_.]  a seat in the
cabinet!

lord caversham.  certainly, and you well deserve it too.  you have got
what we want so much in political life nowadays—high character, high
moral tone, high principles.  [_to_ lord goring.]  everything that you
have not got, sir, and never will have.

lord goring.  i don’t like principles, father.  i prefer prejudices.

[sir robert chiltern _is on the brink of accepting the prime minister’s
offer_, _when he sees wife looking at him with her clear_, _candid eyes_.
_he then realises that it is impossible_.]

sir robert chiltern.  i cannot accept this offer, lord caversham.  i have
made up my mind to decline it.

lord caversham.  decline it, sir!

sir robert chiltern.  my intention is to retire at once from public life.

lord caversham.  [_angrily_.]  decline a seat in the cabinet, and retire
from public life?  never heard such damned nonsense in the whole course
of my existence.  i beg your pardon, lady chiltern.  chiltern, i beg your
pardon.  [_to_ lord goring.]  don’t grin like that, sir.

lord goring.  no, father.

lord caversham.  lady chiltern, you are a sensible woman, the most
sensible woman in london, the most sensible woman i know.  will you
kindly prevent your husband from making such a . . . from taking such
. . . will you kindly do that, lady chiltern?

lady chiltern.  i think my husband in right in his determination, lord
caversham.  i approve of it.

lord caversham.  you approve of it?  good heavens!

lady chiltern.  [_taking her husband’s hand_.]  i admire him for it.  i
admire him immensely for it.  i have never admired him so much before.
he is finer than even i thought him.  [_to_ sir robert chiltern.]  you
will go and write your letter to the prime minister now, won’t you?
don’t hesitate about it, robert.

sir robert chiltern.  [_with a touch of bitterness_.]  i suppose i had
better write it at once.  such offers are not repeated.  i will ask you
to excuse me for a moment, lord caversham.

lady chiltern.  i may come with you, robert, may i not?

sir robert chiltern.  yes, gertrude.

[lady chiltern _goes out with him_.]

lord caversham.  what is the matter with this family?  something wrong
here, eh?  [_tapping his forehead_.]  idiocy?  hereditary, i suppose.
both of them, too.  wife as well as husband.  very sad.  very sad indeed!
and they are not an old family.  can’t understand it.

lord goring.  it is not idiocy, father, i assure you.

lord caversham.  what is it then, sir?

lord goring.  [_after some hesitation_.]  well, it is what is called
nowadays a high moral tone, father.  that is all.

lord caversham.  hate these new-fangled names.  same thing as we used to
call idiocy fifty years ago.  shan’t stay in this house any longer.

lord goring.  [_taking his arm_.]  oh! just go in here for a moment,
father.  third palm tree to the left, the usual palm tree.

lord caversham.  what, sir?

lord goring.  i beg your pardon, father, i forgot.  the conservatory,
father, the conservatory—there is some one there i want you to talk to.

lord caversham.  what about, sir?

lord goring.  about me, father,

lord caversham.  [_grimly_.]  not a subject on which much eloquence is
possible.

lord goring.  no, father; but the lady is like me.  she doesn’t care much
for eloquence in others.  she thinks it a little loud.

[lord caversham _goes out into the conservatory_.  lady chiltern
_enters_.]

lord goring.  lady chiltern, why are you playing mrs. cheveley’s cards?

lady chiltern.  [_startled_.]  i don’t understand you.

lord goring.  mrs. cheveley made an attempt to ruin your husband.  either
to drive him from public life, or to make him adopt a dishonourable
position.  from the latter tragedy you saved him.  the former you are now
thrusting on him.  why should you do him the wrong mrs. cheveley tried to
do and failed?

lady chiltern.  lord goring?

lord goring.  [_pulling himself together for a great effort_, _and
showing the philosopher that underlies the dandy_.]  lady chiltern, allow
me.  you wrote me a letter last night in which you said you trusted me
and wanted my help.  now is the moment when you really want my help, now
is the time when you have got to trust me, to trust in my counsel and
judgment.  you love robert.  do you want to kill his love for you?  what
sort of existence will he have if you rob him of the fruits of his
ambition, if you take him from the splendour of a great political career,
if you close the doors of public life against him, if you condemn him to
sterile failure, he who was made for triumph and success?  women are not
meant to judge us, but to forgive us when we need forgiveness.  pardon,
not punishment, is their mission.  why should you scourge him with rods
for a sin done in his youth, before he knew you, before he knew himself?
a man’s life is of more value than a woman’s.  it has larger issues,
wider scope, greater ambitions.  a woman’s life revolves in curves of
emotions.  it is upon lines of intellect that a man’s life progresses.
don’t make any terrible mistake, lady chiltern.  a woman who can keep a
man’s love, and love him in return, has done all the world wants of
women, or should want of them.

lady chiltern.  [_troubled and hesitating_.]  but it is my husband
himself who wishes to retire from public life.  he feels it is his duty.
it was he who first said so.

lord goring.  rather than lose your love, robert would do anything, wreck
his whole career, as he is on the brink of doing now.  he is making for
you a terrible sacrifice.  take my advice, lady chiltern, and do not
accept a sacrifice so great.  if you do, you will live to repent it
bitterly.  we men and women are not made to accept such sacrifices from
each other.  we are not worthy of them.  besides, robert has been
punished enough.

lady chiltern.  we have both been punished.  i set him up too high.

lord goring.  [_with deep feeling in his voice_.]  do not for that reason
set him down now too low.  if he has fallen from his altar, do not thrust
him into the mire.  failure to robert would be the very mire of shame.
power is his passion.  he would lose everything, even his power to feel
love.  your husband’s life is at this moment in your hands, your
husband’s love is in your hands.  don’t mar both for him.

[_enter_ sir robert chiltern.]

sir robert chiltern.  gertrude, here is the draft of my letter.  shall i
read it to you?

lady chiltern.  let me see it.

[sir robert _hands her the letter_.  _she reads it_, _and then_, _with a
gesture of passion_, _tears it up_.]

sir robert chiltern.  what are you doing?

lady chiltern.  a man’s life is of more value than a woman’s.  it has
larger issues, wider scope, greater ambitions.  our lives revolve in
curves of emotions.  it is upon lines of intellect that a man’s life
progresses.  i have just learnt this, and much else with it, from lord
goring.  and i will not spoil your life for you, nor see you spoil it as
a sacrifice to me, a useless sacrifice!

sir robert chiltern.  gertrude!  gertrude!

lady chiltern.  you can forget.  men easily forget.  and i forgive.  that
is how women help the world.  i see that now.

sir robert chiltern.  [_deeply overcome by emotion_, _embraces her_.]  my
wife! my wife!  [_to_ lord goring.]  arthur, it seems that i am always to
be in your debt.

lord goring.  oh dear no, robert.  your debt is to lady chiltern, not to
me!

sir robert chiltern.  i owe you much.  and now tell me what you were
going to ask me just now as lord caversham came in.

lord goring.  robert, you are your sister’s guardian, and i want your
consent to my marriage with her.  that is all.

lady chiltern.  oh, i am so glad!  i am so glad!  [_shakes hands with_
lord goring.]

lord goring.  thank you, lady chiltern.

sir robert chiltern.  [_with a troubled look_.]  my sister to be your
wife?

lord goring.  yes.

sir robert chiltern.  [_speaking with great firmness_.]  arthur, i am
very sorry, but the thing is quite out of the question.  i have to think
of mabel’s future happiness.  and i don’t think her happiness would be
safe in your hands.  and i cannot have her sacrificed!

lord goring.  sacrificed!

sir robert chiltern.  yes, utterly sacrificed.  loveless marriages are
horrible.  but there is one thing worse than an absolutely loveless
marriage.  a marriage in which there is love, but on one side only;
faith, but on one side only; devotion, but on one side only, and in which
of the two hearts one is sure to be broken.

lord goring.  but i love mabel.  no other woman has any place in my life.

lady chiltern.  robert, if they love each other, why should they not be
married?

sir robert chiltern.  arthur cannot bring mabel the love that she
deserves.

lord goring.  what reason have you for saying that?

sir robert chiltern.  [_after a pause_.]  do you really require me to
tell you?

lord goring.  certainly i do.

sir robert chiltern.  as you choose.  when i called on you yesterday
evening i found mrs. cheveley concealed in your rooms.  it was between
ten and eleven o’clock at night.  i do not wish to say anything more.
your relations with mrs. cheveley have, as i said to you last night,
nothing whatsoever to do with me.  i know you were engaged to be married
to her once.  the fascination she exercised over you then seems to have
returned.  you spoke to me last night of her as of a woman pure and
stainless, a woman whom you respected and honoured.  that may be so.  but
i cannot give my sister’s life into your hands.  it would be wrong of me.
it would be unjust, infamously unjust to her.

lord goring.  i have nothing more to say.

lady chiltern.  robert, it was not mrs. cheveley whom lord goring
expected last night.

sir robert chiltern.  not mrs. cheveley!  who was it then?

lord goring.  lady chiltern!

lady chiltern.  it was your own wife.  robert, yesterday afternoon lord
goring told me that if ever i was in trouble i could come to him for
help, as he was our oldest and best friend.  later on, after that
terrible scene in this room, i wrote to him telling him that i trusted
him, that i had need of him, that i was coming to him for help and
advice.  [sir robert chiltern _takes the letter out of his pocket_.]
yes, that letter.  i didn’t go to lord goring’s, after all.  i felt that
it is from ourselves alone that help can come.  pride made me think that.
mrs. cheveley went.  she stole my letter and sent it anonymously to you
this morning, that you should think . . . oh! robert, i cannot tell you
what she wished you to think. . . .

sir robert chiltern.  what!  had i fallen so low in your eyes that you
thought that even for a moment i could have doubted your goodness?
gertrude, gertrude, you are to me the white image of all good things, and
sin can never touch you.  arthur, you can go to mabel, and you have my
best wishes!  oh! stop a moment.  there is no name at the beginning of
this letter.  the brilliant mrs. cheveley does not seem to have noticed
that.  there should be a name.

lady chiltern.  let me write yours.  it is you i trust and need.  you and
none else.

lord goring.  well, really, lady chiltern, i think i should have back my
own letter.

lady chiltern.  [_smiling_.]  no; you shall have mabel.  [_takes the
letter and writes her husband’s name on it_.]

lord goring.  well, i hope she hasn’t changed her mind.  it’s nearly
twenty minutes since i saw her last.

[_enter_ mabel chiltern _and_ lord caversham.]

mabel chiltern.  lord goring, i think your father’s conversation much
more improving than yours.  i am only going to talk to lord caversham in
the future, and always under the usual palm tree.

lord goring.  darling!  [_kisses her_.]

lord caversham.  [_considerably taken aback_.]  what does this mean, sir?
you don’t mean to say that this charming, clever young lady has been so
foolish as to accept you?

lord goring.  certainly, father!  and chiltern’s been wise enough to
accept the seat in the cabinet.

lord caversham.  i am very glad to hear that, chiltern . . . i
congratulate you, sir.  if the country doesn’t go to the dogs or the
radicals, we shall have you prime minister, some day.

[_enter_ mason.]

mason.  luncheon is on the table, my lady!

[mason _goes out_.]

mabel chiltern.  you’ll stop to luncheon, lord caversham, won’t you?

lord caversham.  with pleasure, and i’ll drive you down to downing street
afterwards, chiltern.  you have a great future before you, a great
future.  wish i could say the same for you, sir.  [_to_ lord goring.]
but your career will have to be entirely domestic.

lord goring.  yes, father, i prefer it domestic.

lord caversham.  and if you don’t make this young lady an ideal husband,
i’ll cut you off with a shilling.

mabel chiltern.  an ideal husband!  oh, i don’t think i should like that.
it sounds like something in the next world.

lord caversham.  what do you want him to be then, dear?

mabel chiltern.  he can be what he chooses.  all i want is to be . . . to
be . . . oh! a real wife to him.

lord caversham.  upon my word, there is a good deal of common sense in
that, lady chiltern.

[_they all go out except_ sir robert chiltern.  _he sinks in a chair_,
_wrapt in thought_.  _after a little time_ lady chiltern _returns to look
for him_.]

lady chiltern.  [_leaning over the back of the chair_.]  aren’t you
coming in, robert?

sir robert chiltern.  [_taking her hand_.]  gertrude, is it love you feel
for me, or is it pity merely?

lady chiltern.  [_kisses him_.]  it is love, robert.  love, and only
love.  for both of us a new life is beginning.


<|EndOfText|>

i


when mr. hiram b. otis, the american minister, bought canterville chase,
every one told him he was doing a very foolish thing, as there was no
doubt at all that the place was haunted. indeed, lord canterville
himself, who was a man of the most punctilious honour, had felt it his
duty to mention the fact to mr. otis when they came to discuss terms.

"we have not cared to live in the place ourselves," said lord
canterville, "since my grandaunt, the dowager duchess of bolton, was
frightened into a fit, from which she never really recovered, by two
skeleton hands being placed on her shoulders as she was dressing for
dinner, and i feel bound to tell you, mr. otis, that the ghost has been
seen by several living members of my family, as well as by the rector of
the parish, the rev. augustus dampier, who is a fellow of king's
college, cambridge. after the unfortunate accident to the duchess, none
of our younger servants would stay with us, and lady canterville often
got very little sleep at night, in consequence of the mysterious noises
that came from the corridor and the library."

"my lord," answered the minister, "i will take the furniture and the
ghost at a valuation. i have come from a modern country, where we have
everything that money can buy; and with all our spry young fellows
painting the old world red, and carrying off your best actors and
prima-donnas, i reckon that if there were such a thing as a ghost in
europe, we'd have it at home in a very short time in one of our public
museums, or on the road as a show."

"i fear that the ghost exists," said lord canterville, smiling, "though
it may have resisted the overtures of your enterprising impresarios. it
has been well known for three centuries, since 1584 in fact, and always
makes its appearance before the death of any member of our family."

"well, so does the family doctor for that matter, lord canterville. but
there is no such thing, sir, as a ghost, and i guess the laws of nature
are not going to be suspended for the british aristocracy."

"you are certainly very natural in america," answered lord canterville,
who did not quite understand mr. otis's last observation, "and if you
don't mind a ghost in the house, it is all right. only you must remember
i warned you."

[illustration: miss virginia e. otis]

a few weeks after this, the purchase was concluded, and at the close of
the season the minister and his family went down to canterville chase.
mrs. otis, who, as miss lucretia r. tappan, of west 53d street, had been
a celebrated new york belle, was now a very handsome, middle-aged woman,
with fine eyes, and a superb profile. many american ladies on leaving
their native land adopt an appearance of chronic ill-health, under the
impression that it is a form of european refinement, but mrs. otis had
never fallen into this error. she had a magnificent constitution, and a
really wonderful amount of animal spirits. indeed, in many respects, she
was quite english, and was an excellent example of the fact that we
have really everything in common with america nowadays, except, of
course, language. her eldest son, christened washington by his parents
in a moment of patriotism, which he never ceased to regret, was a
fair-haired, rather good-looking young man, who had qualified himself
for american diplomacy by leading the german at the newport casino for
three successive seasons, and even in london was well known as an
excellent dancer. gardenias and the peerage were his only weaknesses.
otherwise he was extremely sensible. miss virginia e. otis was a little
girl of fifteen, lithe and lovely as a fawn, and with a fine freedom
in her large blue eyes. she was a wonderful amazon, and had once raced
old lord bilton on her pony twice round the park, winning by a length
and a half, just in front of the achilles statue, to the huge delight of
the young duke of cheshire, who proposed for her on the spot, and was
sent back to eton that very night by his guardians, in floods of tears.
after virginia came the twins, who were usually called "the star and
stripes," as they were always getting swished. they were delightful
boys, and, with the exception of the worthy minister, the only true
republicans of the family.

[illustration: "had once raced old lord bilton on her pony"]

as canterville chase is seven miles from ascot, the nearest railway
station, mr. otis had telegraphed for a waggonette to meet them, and
they started on their drive in high spirits. it was a lovely july
evening, and the air was delicate with the scent of the pinewoods. now
and then they heard a wood-pigeon brooding over its own sweet voice, or
saw, deep in the rustling fern, the burnished breast of the pheasant.
little squirrels peered at them from the beech-trees as they went by,
and the rabbits scudded away through the brushwood and over the mossy
knolls, with their white tails in the air. as they entered the avenue of
canterville chase, however, the sky became suddenly overcast with
clouds, a curious stillness seemed to hold the atmosphere, a great
flight of rooks passed silently over their heads, and, before they
reached the house, some big drops of rain had fallen.

standing on the steps to receive them was an old woman, neatly dressed
in black silk, with a white cap and apron. this was mrs. umney, the
housekeeper, whom mrs. otis, at lady canterville's earnest request, had
consented to keep in her former position. she made them each a low
curtsey as they alighted, and said in a quaint, old-fashioned manner,
"i bid you welcome to canterville chase." following her, they passed
through the fine tudor hall into the library, a long, low room, panelled
in black oak, at the end of which was a large stained glass window. here
they found tea laid out for them, and, after taking off their wraps,
they sat down and began to look round, while mrs. umney waited on them.

suddenly mrs. otis caught sight of a dull red stain on the floor just by
the fireplace, and, quite unconscious of what it really signified, said
to mrs. umney, "i am afraid something has been spilt there."

"yes, madam," replied the old housekeeper in a low voice, "blood has
been spilt on that spot."

[illustration: "blood has been spilled on that spot"]

"how horrid!" cried mrs. otis; "i don't at all care for blood-stains in
a sitting-room. it must be removed at once."

the old woman smiled, and answered in the same low, mysterious voice,
"it is the blood of lady eleanore de canterville, who was murdered on
that very spot by her own husband, sir simon de canterville, in 1575.
sir simon survived her nine years, and disappeared suddenly under very
mysterious circumstances. his body has never been discovered, but his
guilty spirit still haunts the chase. the blood-stain has been much
admired by tourists and others, and cannot be removed."

"that is all nonsense," cried washington otis; "pinkerton's champion
stain remover and paragon detergent will clean it up in no time," and
before the terrified housekeeper could interfere, he had fallen upon his
knees, and was rapidly scouring the floor with a small stick of what
looked like a black cosmetic. in a few moments no trace of the
blood-stain could be seen.

"i knew pinkerton would do it," he exclaimed, triumphantly, as he
looked round at his admiring family; but no sooner had he said these
words than a terrible flash of lightning lit up the sombre room, a
fearful peal of thunder made them all start to their feet, and mrs.
umney fainted.

"what a monstrous climate!" said the american minister, calmly, as he
lit a long cheroot. "i guess the old country is so overpopulated that
they have not enough decent weather for everybody. i have always been of
opinion that emigration is the only thing for england."

"my dear hiram," cried mrs. otis, "what can we do with a woman who
faints?"

"charge it to her like breakages," answered the minister; "she won't
faint after that;" and in a few moments mrs. umney certainly came to.
there was no doubt, however, that she was extremely upset, and she
sternly warned mr. otis to beware of some trouble coming to the house.

"i have seen things with my own eyes, sir," she said, "that would make
any christian's hair stand on end, and many and many a night i have not
closed my eyes in sleep for the awful things that are done here." mr.
otis, however, and his wife warmly assured the honest soul that they
were not afraid of ghosts, and, after invoking the blessings of
providence on her new master and mistress, and making arrangements for
an increase of salary, the old housekeeper tottered off to her own room.




ii


the storm raged fiercely all that night, but nothing of particular note
occurred. the next morning, however, when they came down to breakfast,
they found the terrible stain of blood once again on the floor. "i don't
think it can be the fault of the paragon detergent," said washington,
"for i have tried it with everything. it must be the ghost." he
accordingly rubbed out the stain a second time, but the second morning
it appeared again. the third morning also it was there, though the
library had been locked up at night by mr. otis himself, and the key
carried up-stairs. the whole family were now quite interested; mr. otis
began to suspect that he had been too dogmatic in his denial of the
existence of ghosts, mrs. otis expressed her intention of joining the
psychical society, and washington prepared a long letter to messrs.
myers and podmore on the subject of the permanence of sanguineous stains
when connected with crime. that night all doubts about the objective
existence of phantasmata were removed for ever.

the day had been warm and sunny; and, in the cool of the evening, the
whole family went out to drive. they did not return home till nine
o'clock, when they had a light supper. the conversation in no way turned
upon ghosts, so there were not even those primary conditions of
receptive expectations which so often precede the presentation of
psychical phenomena. the subjects discussed, as i have since learned
from mr. otis, were merely such as form the ordinary conversation of
cultured americans of the better class, such as the immense superiority
of miss fanny devonport over sarah bernhardt as an actress; the
difficulty of obtaining green corn, buckwheat cakes, and hominy, even in
the best english houses; the importance of boston in the development of
the world-soul; the advantages of the baggage-check system in railway
travelling; and the sweetness of the new york accent as compared to the
london drawl. no mention at all was made of the supernatural, nor was
sir simon de canterville alluded to in any way. at eleven o'clock the
family retired, and by half-past all the lights were out. some time
after, mr. otis was awakened by a curious noise in the corridor, outside
his room. it sounded like the clank of metal, and seemed to be coming
nearer every moment. he got up at once, struck a match, and looked at
the time. it was exactly one o'clock. he was quite calm, and felt his
pulse, which was not at all feverish. the strange noise still continued,
and with it he heard distinctly the sound of footsteps. he put on his
slippers, took a small oblong phial out of his dressing-case, and opened
the door. right in front of him he saw, in the wan moonlight, an old man
of terrible aspect. his eyes were as red burning coals; long grey hair
fell over his shoulders in matted coils; his garments, which were of
antique cut, were soiled and ragged, and from his wrists and ankles hung
heavy manacles and rusty gyves.

"my dear sir," said mr. otis, "i really must insist on your oiling those
chains, and have brought you for that purpose a small bottle of the
tammany rising sun lubricator. it is said to be completely efficacious
upon one application, and there are several testimonials to that effect
on the wrapper from some of our most eminent native divines. i shall
leave it here for you by the bedroom candles, and will be happy to
supply you with more, should you require it." with these words the
united states minister laid the bottle down on a marble table, and,
closing his door, retired to rest.

[illustration: "i really must insist on your oiling those chains"]

for a moment the canterville ghost stood quite motionless in natural
indignation; then, dashing the bottle violently upon the polished floor,
he fled down the corridor, uttering hollow groans, and emitting a
ghastly green light. just, however, as he reached the top of the great
oak staircase, a door was flung open, two little white-robed figures
appeared, and a large pillow whizzed past his head! there was evidently
no time to be lost, so, hastily adopting the fourth dimension of space
as a means of escape, he vanished through the wainscoting, and the house
became quite quiet.

on reaching a small secret chamber in the left wing, he leaned up
against a moonbeam to recover his breath, and began to try and realize
his position. never, in a brilliant and uninterrupted career of three
hundred years, had he been so grossly insulted. he thought of the
dowager duchess, whom he had frightened into a fit as she stood before
the glass in her lace and diamonds; of the four housemaids, who had gone
into hysterics when he merely grinned at them through the curtains on
one of the spare bedrooms; of the rector of the parish, whose candle he
had blown out as he was coming late one night from the library, and who
had been under the care of sir william gull ever since, a perfect martyr
to nervous disorders; and of old madame de tremouillac, who, having
wakened up one morning early and seen a skeleton seated in an armchair
by the fire reading her diary, had been confined to her bed for six
weeks with an attack of brain fever, and, on her recovery, had become
reconciled to the church, and broken off her connection with that
notorious sceptic, monsieur de voltaire. he remembered the terrible
night when the wicked lord canterville was found choking in his
dressing-room, with the knave of diamonds half-way down his throat, and
confessed, just before he died, that he had cheated charles james fox
out of £50,000 at crockford's by means of that very card, and swore that
the ghost had made him swallow it. all his great achievements came back
to him again, from the butler who had shot himself in the pantry because
he had seen a green hand tapping at the window-pane, to the beautiful
lady stutfield, who was always obliged to wear a black velvet band round
her throat to hide the mark of five fingers burnt upon her white skin,
and who drowned herself at last in the carp-pond at the end of the
king's walk. with the enthusiastic egotism of the true artist, he went
over his most celebrated performances, and smiled bitterly to himself as
he recalled to mind his last appearance as "red reuben, or the strangled
babe," his _début_ as "guant gibeon, the blood-sucker of bexley moor,"
and the _furore_ he had excited one lovely june evening by merely
playing ninepins with his own bones upon the lawn-tennis ground. and
after all this some wretched modern americans were to come and offer him
the rising sun lubricator, and throw pillows at his head! it was quite
unbearable. besides, no ghost in history had ever been treated in this
manner. accordingly, he determined to have vengeance, and remained till
daylight in an attitude of deep thought.




iii


the next morning, when the otis family met at breakfast, they discussed
the ghost at some length. the united states minister was naturally a
little annoyed to find that his present had not been accepted. "i have
no wish," he said, "to do the ghost any personal injury, and i must say
that, considering the length of time he has been in the house, i don't
think it is at all polite to throw pillows at him,"--a very just remark,
at which, i am sorry to say, the twins burst into shouts of laughter.
"upon the other hand," he continued, "if he really declines to use the
rising sun lubricator, we shall have to take his chains from him. it
would be quite impossible to sleep, with such a noise going on outside
the bedrooms."

for the rest of the week, however, they were undisturbed, the only thing
that excited any attention being the continual renewal of the
blood-stain on the library floor. this certainly was very strange, as
the door was always locked at night by mr. otis, and the windows kept
closely barred. the chameleon-like colour, also, of the stain excited a
good deal of comment. some mornings it was a dull (almost indian) red,
then it would be vermilion, then a rich purple, and once when they came
down for family prayers, according to the simple rites of the free
american reformed episcopalian church, they found it a bright
emerald-green. these kaleidoscopic changes naturally amused the party
very much, and bets on the subject were freely made every evening. the
only person who did not enter into the joke was little virginia, who,
for some unexplained reason, was always a good deal distressed at the
sight of the blood-stain, and very nearly cried the morning it was
emerald-green.

the second appearance of the ghost was on sunday night. shortly after
they had gone to bed they were suddenly alarmed by a fearful crash in
the hall. rushing down-stairs, they found that a large suit of old
armour had become detached from its stand, and had fallen on the stone
floor, while seated in a high-backed chair was the canterville ghost,
rubbing his knees with an expression of acute agony on his face. the
twins, having brought their pea-shooters with them, at once discharged
two pellets on him, with that accuracy of aim which can only be attained
by long and careful practice on a writing-master, while the united
states minister covered him with his revolver, and called upon him, in
accordance with californian etiquette, to hold up his hands! the ghost
started up with a wild shriek of rage, and swept through them like a
mist, extinguishing washington otis's candle as he passed, and so
leaving them all in total darkness. on reaching the top of the staircase
he recovered himself, and determined to give his celebrated peal of
demoniac laughter. this he had on more than one occasion found extremely
useful. it was said to have turned lord raker's wig grey in a single
night, and had certainly made three of lady canterville's french
governesses give warning before their month was up. he accordingly
laughed his most horrible laugh, till the old vaulted roof rang and
rang again, but hardly had the fearful echo died away when a door
opened, and mrs. otis came out in a light blue dressing-gown. "i am
afraid you are far from well," she said, "and have brought you a bottle
of doctor dobell's tincture. if it is indigestion, you will find it a
most excellent remedy." the ghost glared at her in fury, and began at
once to make preparations for turning himself into a large black dog, an
accomplishment for which he was justly renowned, and to which the family
doctor always attributed the permanent idiocy of lord canterville's
uncle, the hon. thomas horton. the sound of approaching footsteps,
however, made him hesitate in his fell purpose, so he contented himself
with becoming faintly phosphorescent, and vanished with a deep
churchyard groan, just as the twins had come up to him.

[illustration: "the twins ... at once discharged two pellets on him"]

on reaching his room he entirely broke down, and became a prey to the
most violent agitation. the vulgarity of the twins, and the gross
materialism of mrs. otis, were naturally extremely annoying, but what
really distressed him most was that he had been unable to wear the suit
of mail. he had hoped that even modern americans would be thrilled by
the sight of a spectre in armour, if for no more sensible reason, at
least out of respect for their natural poet longfellow, over whose
graceful and attractive poetry he himself had whiled away many a weary
hour when the cantervilles were up in town. besides it was his own suit.
he had worn it with great success at the kenilworth tournament, and had
been highly complimented on it by no less a person than the virgin queen
herself. yet when he had put it on, he had been completely overpowered
by the weight of the huge breastplate and steel casque, and had fallen
heavily on the stone pavement, barking both his knees severely, and
bruising the knuckles of his right hand.

for some days after this he was extremely ill, and hardly stirred out of
his room at all, except to keep the blood-stain in proper repair.
however, by taking great care of himself, he recovered, and resolved to
make a third attempt to frighten the united states minister and his
family. he selected friday, august 17th, for his appearance, and spent
most of that day in looking over his wardrobe, ultimately deciding in
favour of a large slouched hat with a red feather, a winding-sheet
frilled at the wrists and neck, and a rusty dagger. towards evening a
violent storm of rain came on, and the wind was so high that all the
windows and doors in the old house shook and rattled. in fact, it was
just such weather as he loved. his plan of action was this. he was to
make his way quietly to washington otis's room, gibber at him from the
foot of the bed, and stab himself three times in the throat to the sound
of low music. he bore washington a special grudge, being quite aware
that it was he who was in the habit of removing the famous canterville
blood-stain by means of pinkerton's paragon detergent. having reduced
the reckless and foolhardy youth to a condition of abject terror, he was
then to proceed to the room occupied by the united states minister and
his wife, and there to place a clammy hand on mrs. otis's forehead,
while he hissed into her trembling husband's ear the awful secrets of
the charnel-house. with regard to little virginia, he had not quite made
up his mind. she had never insulted him in any way, and was pretty and
gentle. a few hollow groans from the wardrobe, he thought, would be more
than sufficient, or, if that failed to wake her, he might grabble at the
counterpane with palsy-twitching fingers. as for the twins, he was quite
determined to teach them a lesson. the first thing to be done was, of
course, to sit upon their chests, so as to produce the stifling
sensation of nightmare. then, as their beds were quite close to each
other, to stand between them in the form of a green, icy-cold corpse,
till they became paralyzed with fear, and finally, to throw off the
winding-sheet, and crawl round the room, with white, bleached bones and
one rolling eyeball, in the character of "dumb daniel, or the suicide's
skeleton," a _rôle_ in which he had on more than one occasion produced a
great effect, and which he considered quite equal to his famous part of
"martin the maniac, or the masked mystery."

at half-past ten he heard the family going to bed. for some time he was
disturbed by wild shrieks of laughter from the twins, who, with the
light-hearted gaiety of schoolboys, were evidently amusing themselves
before they retired to rest, but at a quarter-past eleven all was still,
and, as midnight sounded, he sallied forth. the owl beat against the
window-panes, the raven croaked from the old yew-tree, and the wind
wandered moaning round the house like a lost soul; but the otis family
slept unconscious of their doom, and high above the rain and storm he
could hear the steady snoring of the minister for the united states. he
stepped stealthily out of the wainscoting, with an evil smile on his
cruel, wrinkled mouth, and the moon hid her face in a cloud as he stole
past the great oriel window, where his own arms and those of his
murdered wife were blazoned in azure and gold. on and on he glided, like
an evil shadow, the very darkness seeming to loathe him as he passed.
once he thought he heard something call, and stopped; but it was only
the baying of a dog from the red farm, and he went on, muttering strange
sixteenth-century curses, and ever and anon brandishing the rusty dagger
in the midnight air. finally he reached the corner of the passage that
led to luckless washington's room. for a moment he paused there, the
wind blowing his long grey locks about his head, and twisting into
grotesque and fantastic folds the nameless horror of the dead man's
shroud. then the clock struck the quarter, and he felt the time was
come. he chuckled to himself, and turned the corner; but no sooner had
he done so than, with a piteous wail of terror, he fell back, and hid
his blanched face in his long, bony hands. right in front of him was
standing a horrible spectre, motionless as a carven image, and monstrous
as a madman's dream! its head was bald and burnished; its face round,
and fat, and white; and hideous laughter seemed to have writhed its
features into an eternal grin. from the eyes streamed rays of scarlet
light, the mouth was a wide well of fire, and a hideous garment, like
to his own, swathed with its silent snows the titan form. on its breast
was a placard with strange writing in antique characters, some scroll of
shame it seemed, some record of wild sins, some awful calendar of crime,
and, with its right hand, it bore aloft a falchion of gleaming steel.

[illustration: "its head was bald and burnished"]

never having seen a ghost before, he naturally was terribly frightened,
and, after a second hasty glance at the awful phantom, he fled back to
his room, tripping up in his long winding-sheet as he sped down the
corridor, and finally dropping the rusty dagger into the minister's
jack-boots, where it was found in the morning by the butler. once in the
privacy of his own apartment, he flung himself down on a small
pallet-bed, and hid his face under the clothes. after a time, however,
the brave old canterville spirit asserted itself, and he determined to
go and speak to the other ghost as soon as it was daylight. accordingly,
just as the dawn was touching the hills with silver, he returned towards
the spot where he had first laid eyes on the grisly phantom, feeling
that, after all, two ghosts were better than one, and that, by the aid
of his new friend, he might safely grapple with the twins. on reaching
the spot, however, a terrible sight met his gaze. something had
evidently happened to the spectre, for the light had entirely faded from
its hollow eyes, the gleaming falchion had fallen from its hand, and it
was leaning up against the wall in a strained and uncomfortable
attitude. he rushed forward and seized it in his arms, when, to his
horror, the head slipped off and rolled on the floor, the body assumed a
recumbent posture, and he found himself clasping a white dimity
bed-curtain, with a sweeping-brush, a kitchen cleaver, and a hollow
turnip lying at his feet! unable to understand this curious
transformation, he clutched the placard with feverish haste, and there,
in the grey morning light, he read these fearful words:--

        +------------------------------------+
        |         ye otis ghoste             |
        | ye onlie true and originale spook, |
        |    beware of ye imitationes.       |
        |   all others are counterfeite.     |
        +------------------------------------+

the whole thing flashed across him. he had been tricked, foiled, and
out-witted! the old canterville look came into his eyes; he ground his
toothless gums together; and, raising his withered hands high above his
head, swore according to the picturesque phraseology of the antique
school, that, when chanticleer had sounded twice his merry horn, deeds
of blood would be wrought, and murder walk abroad with silent feet.

hardly had he finished this awful oath when, from the red-tiled roof of
a distant homestead, a cock crew. he laughed a long, low, bitter laugh,
and waited. hour after hour he waited, but the cock, for some strange
reason, did not crow again. finally, at half-past seven, the arrival of
the housemaids made him give up his fearful vigil, and he stalked back
to his room, thinking of his vain oath and baffled purpose. there he
consulted several books of ancient chivalry, of which he was
exceedingly fond, and found that, on every occasion on which this oath
had been used, chanticleer had always crowed a second time. "perdition
seize the naughty fowl," he muttered, "i have seen the day when, with my
stout spear, i would have run him through the gorge, and made him crow
for me an 'twere in death!" he then retired to a comfortable lead
coffin, and stayed there till evening.




iv


[illustration: "he met with a severe fall"]

the next day the ghost was very weak and tired. the terrible excitement
of the last four weeks was beginning to have its effect. his nerves were
completely shattered, and he started at the slightest noise. for five
days he kept his room, and at last made up his mind to give up the point
of the blood-stain on the library floor. if the otis family did not want
it, they clearly did not deserve it. they were evidently people on a
low, material plane of existence, and quite incapable of appreciating
the symbolic value of sensuous phenomena. the question of phantasmic
apparitions, and the development of astral bodies, was of course quite a
different matter, and really not under his control. it was his solemn
duty to appear in the corridor once a week, and to gibber from the large
oriel window on the first and third wednesdays in every month, and he
did not see how he could honourably escape from his obligations. it is
quite true that his life had been very evil, but, upon the other hand,
he was most conscientious in all things connected with the supernatural.
for the next three saturdays, accordingly, he traversed the corridor as
usual between midnight and three o'clock, taking every possible
precaution against being either heard or seen. he removed his boots,
trod as lightly as possible on the old worm-eaten boards, wore a large
black velvet cloak, and was careful to use the rising sun lubricator for
oiling his chains. i am bound to acknowledge that it was with a good
deal of difficulty that he brought himself to adopt this last mode of
protection. however, one night, while the family were at dinner, he
slipped into mr. otis's bedroom and carried off the bottle. he felt a
little humiliated at first, but afterwards was sensible enough to see
that there was a great deal to be said for the invention, and, to a
certain degree, it served his purpose. still in spite of everything he
was not left unmolested. strings were continually being stretched across
the corridor, over which he tripped in the dark, and on one occasion,
while dressed for the part of "black isaac, or the huntsman of hogley
woods," he met with a severe fall, through treading on a butter-slide,
which the twins had constructed from the entrance of the tapestry
chamber to the top of the oak staircase. this last insult so enraged
him, that he resolved to make one final effort to assert his dignity and
social position, and determined to visit the insolent young etonians the
next night in his celebrated character of "reckless rupert, or the
headless earl."

[illustration: "a heavy jug of water fell right down on him."]

he had not appeared in this disguise for more than seventy years; in
fact, not since he had so frightened pretty lady barbara modish by means
of it, that she suddenly broke off her engagement with the present lord
canterville's grandfather, and ran away to gretna green with handsome
jack castletown, declaring that nothing in the world would induce her to
marry into a family that allowed such a horrible phantom to walk up and
down the terrace at twilight. poor jack was afterwards shot in a duel by
lord canterville on wandsworth common, and lady barbara died of a broken
heart at tunbridge wells before the year was out, so, in every way, it
had been a great success. it was, however an extremely difficult
"make-up," if i may use such a theatrical expression in connection with
one of the greatest mysteries of the supernatural, or, to employ a more
scientific term, the higher-natural world, and it took him fully three
hours to make his preparations. at last everything was ready, and he was
very pleased with his appearance. the big leather riding-boots that went
with the dress were just a little too large for him, and he could only
find one of the two horse-pistols, but, on the whole, he was quite
satisfied, and at a quarter-past one he glided out of the wainscoting
and crept down the corridor. on reaching the room occupied by the twins,
which i should mention was called the blue bed chamber, on account of
the colour of its hangings, he found the door just ajar. wishing to make
an effective entrance, he flung it wide open, when a heavy jug of water
fell right down on him, wetting him to the skin, and just missing his
left shoulder by a couple of inches. at the same moment he heard stifled
shrieks of laughter proceeding from the four-post bed. the shock to his
nervous system was so great that he fled back to his room as hard as he
could go, and the next day he was laid up with a severe cold. the only
thing that at all consoled him in the whole affair was the fact that he
had not brought his head with him, for, had he done so, the consequences
might have been very serious.

[illustration: "making satirical remarks on the photographs"]

he now gave up all hope of ever frightening this rude american family,
and contented himself, as a rule, with creeping about the passages in
list slippers, with a thick red muffler round his throat for fear of
draughts, and a small arquebuse, in case he should be attacked by the
twins. the final blow he received occurred on the 19th of september. he
had gone down-stairs to the great entrance-hall, feeling sure that
there, at any rate, he would be quite unmolested, and was amusing
himself by making satirical remarks on the large saroni photographs of
the united states minister and his wife which had now taken the place of
the canterville family pictures. he was simply but neatly clad in a long
shroud, spotted with churchyard mould, had tied up his jaw with a strip
of yellow linen, and carried a small lantern and a sexton's spade. in
fact, he was dressed for the character of "jonas the graveless, or the
corpse-snatcher of chertsey barn," one of his most remarkable
impersonations, and one which the cantervilles had every reason to
remember, as it was the real origin of their quarrel with their
neighbour, lord rufford. it was about a quarter-past two o'clock in
the morning, and, as far as he could ascertain, no one was stirring. as
he was strolling towards the library, however, to see if there were any
traces left of the blood-stain, suddenly there leaped out on him from a
dark corner two figures, who waved their arms wildly above their heads,
and shrieked out "boo!" in his ear.

[illustration: "suddenly there leaped out two figures."]

seized with a panic, which, under the circumstances, was only natural,
he rushed for the staircase, but found washington otis waiting for him
there with the big garden-syringe, and being thus hemmed in by his
enemies on every side, and driven almost to bay, he vanished into the
great iron stove, which, fortunately for him, was not lit, and had to
make his way home through the flues and chimneys, arriving at his own
room in a terrible state of dirt, disorder, and despair.

after this he was not seen again on any nocturnal expedition. the twins
lay in wait for him on several occasions, and strewed the passages with
nutshells every night to the great annoyance of their parents and the
servants, but it was of no avail. it was quite evident that his feelings
were so wounded that he would not appear. mr. otis consequently resumed
his great work on the history of the democratic party, on which he had
been engaged for some years; mrs. otis organized a wonderful
clam-bake, which amazed the whole county; the boys took to lacrosse
euchre, poker, and other american national games, and virginia rode
about the lanes on her pony, accompanied by the young duke of cheshire,
who had come to spend the last week of his holidays at canterville
chase. it was generally assumed that the ghost had gone away, and, in
fact, mr. otis wrote a letter to that effect to lord canterville, who,
in reply, expressed his great pleasure at the news, and sent his best
congratulations to the minister's worthy wife.

the otises, however, were deceived, for the ghost was still in the
house, and though now almost an invalid, was by no means ready to let
matters rest, particularly as he heard that among the guests was the
young duke of cheshire, whose grand-uncle, lord francis stilton, had
once bet a hundred guineas with colonel carbury that he would play dice
with the canterville ghost, and was found the next morning lying on the
floor of the card-room in such a helpless paralytic state that, though
he lived on to a great age, he was never able to say anything again but
"double sixes." the story was well known at the time, though, of course,
out of respect to the feelings of the two noble families, every attempt
was made to hush it up, and a full account of all the circumstances
connected with it will be found in the third volume of lord tattle's
_recollections of the prince regent and his friends_. the ghost, then,
was naturally very anxious to show that he had not lost his influence
over the stiltons, with whom, indeed, he was distantly connected, his
own first cousin having been married _en secondes noces_ to the sieur de
bulkeley, from whom, as every one knows, the dukes of cheshire are
lineally descended. accordingly, he made arrangements for appearing to
virginia's little lover in his celebrated impersonation of "the vampire
monk, or the bloodless benedictine," a performance so horrible that when
old lady startup saw it, which she did on one fatal new year's eve, in
the year 1764, she went off into the most piercing shrieks, which
culminated in violent apoplexy, and died in three days, after
disinheriting the cantervilles, who were her nearest relations, and
leaving all her money to her london apothecary. at the last moment,
however, his terror of the twins prevented his leaving his room, and the
little duke slept in peace under the great feathered canopy in the royal
bedchamber, and dreamed of virginia.




v


a few days after this, virginia and her curly-haired cavalier went out
riding on brockley meadows, where she tore her habit so badly in getting
through a hedge that, on their return home, she made up her mind to go
up by the back staircase so as not to be seen. as she was running past
the tapestry chamber, the door of which happened to be open, she fancied
she saw some one inside, and thinking it was her mother's maid, who
sometimes used to bring her work there, looked in to ask her to mend
her habit. to her immense surprise, however, it was the canterville
ghost himself! he was sitting by the window, watching the ruined gold of
the yellowing trees fly through the air, and the red leaves dancing
madly down the long avenue. his head was leaning on his hand, and his
whole attitude was one of extreme depression. indeed, so forlorn, and so
much out of repair did he look, that little virginia, whose first idea
had been to run away and lock herself in her room, was filled with pity,
and determined to try and comfort him. so light was her footfall, and so
deep his melancholy, that he was not aware of her presence till she
spoke to him.

"i am so sorry for you," she said, "but my brothers are going back to
eton to-morrow, and then, if you behave yourself, no one will annoy
you."

"it is absurd asking me to behave myself," he answered, looking round in
astonishment at the pretty little girl who had ventured to address him,
"quite absurd. i must rattle my chains, and groan through keyholes, and
walk about at night, if that is what you mean. it is my only reason for
existing."

"it is no reason at all for existing, and you know you have been very
wicked. mrs. umney told us, the first day we arrived here, that you had
killed your wife."

"well, i quite admit it," said the ghost, petulantly, "but it was a
purely family matter, and concerned no one else."

"it is very wrong to kill any one," said virginia, who at times had a
sweet puritan gravity, caught from some old new england ancestor.

"oh, i hate the cheap severity of abstract ethics! my wife was very
plain, never had my ruffs properly starched, and knew nothing about
cookery. why, there was a buck i had shot in hogley woods, a magnificent
pricket, and do you know how she had it sent to table? however, it is
no matter now, for it is all over, and i don't think it was very nice of
her brothers to starve me to death, though i did kill her."

"starve you to death? oh, mr. ghost--i mean sir simon, are you hungry? i
have a sandwich in my case. would you like it?"

"no, thank you, i never eat anything now; but it is very kind of you,
all the same, and you are much nicer than the rest of your horrid, rude,
vulgar, dishonest family."

"stop!" cried virginia, stamping her foot, "it is you who are rude, and
horrid, and vulgar, and as for dishonesty, you know you stole the
paints out of my box to try and furbish up that ridiculous blood-stain
in the library. first you took all my reds, including the vermilion, and
i couldn't do any more sunsets, then you took the emerald-green and the
chrome-yellow, and finally i had nothing left but indigo and chinese
white, and could only do moonlight scenes, which are always depressing
to look at, and not at all easy to paint. i never told on you, though i
was very much annoyed, and it was most ridiculous, the whole thing; for
who ever heard of emerald-green blood?"

"well, really," said the ghost, rather meekly, "what was i to do? it is
a very difficult thing to get real blood nowadays, and, as your brother
began it all with his paragon detergent, i certainly saw no reason why i
should not have your paints. as for colour, that is always a matter of
taste: the cantervilles have blue blood, for instance, the very bluest
in england; but i know you americans don't care for things of this
kind."

"you know nothing about it, and the best thing you can do is to emigrate
and improve your mind. my father will be only too happy to give you a
free passage, and though there is a heavy duty on spirits of every kind,
there will be no difficulty about the custom house, as the officers are
all democrats. once in new york, you are sure to be a great success. i
know lots of people there who would give a hundred thousand dollars to
have a grandfather, and much more than that to have a family ghost."

"i don't think i should like america."

"i suppose because we have no ruins and no curiosities," said virginia,
satirically.

"no ruins! no curiosities!" answered the ghost; "you have your navy and
your manners."

"good evening; i will go and ask papa to get the twins an extra week's
holiday."

"please don't go, miss virginia," he cried; "i am so lonely and so
unhappy, and i really don't know what to do. i want to go to sleep and i
cannot."

"that's quite absurd! you have merely to go to bed and blow out the
candle. it is very difficult sometimes to keep awake, especially at
church, but there is no difficulty at all about sleeping. why, even
babies know how to do that, and they are not very clever."

"i have not slept for three hundred years," he said sadly, and
virginia's beautiful blue eyes opened in wonder; "for three hundred
years i have not slept, and i am so tired."

virginia grew quite grave, and her little lips trembled like
rose-leaves. she came towards him, and kneeling down at his side, looked
up into his old withered face.

"poor, poor ghost," she murmured; "have you no place where you can
sleep?"

[illustration: "'poor, poor ghost,' she murmured; 'have you no place
where you can sleep?'"]

"far away beyond the pine-woods," he answered, in a low, dreamy voice,
"there is a little garden. there the grass grows long and deep, there
are the great white stars of the hemlock flower, there the nightingale
sings all night long. all night long he sings, and the cold crystal
moon looks down, and the yew-tree spreads out its giant arms over the
sleepers."

virginia's eyes grew dim with tears, and she hid her face in her hands.

"you mean the garden of death," she whispered.

"yes, death. death must be so beautiful. to lie in the soft brown earth,
with the grasses waving above one's head, and listen to silence. to have
no yesterday, and no to-morrow. to forget time, to forget life, to be at
peace. you can help me. you can open for me the portals of death's
house, for love is always with you, and love is stronger than death
is."

virginia trembled, a cold shudder ran through her, and for a few moments
there was silence. she felt as if she was in a terrible dream.

then the ghost spoke again, and his voice sounded like the sighing of
the wind.

"have you ever read the old prophecy on the library window?"

"oh, often," cried the little girl, looking up; "i know it quite well.
it is painted in curious black letters, and is difficult to read. there
are only six lines:

    "'when a golden girl can win
    prayer from out the lips of sin,
    when the barren almond bears,
    and a little child gives away its tears,
    then shall all the house be still
    and peace come to canterville.'

"but i don't know what they mean."

"they mean," he said, sadly, "that you must weep with me for my sins,
because i have no tears, and pray with me for my soul, because i have no
faith, and then, if you have always been sweet, and good, and gentle,
the angel of death will have mercy on me. you will see fearful shapes in
darkness, and wicked voices will whisper in your ear, but they will not
harm you, for against the purity of a little child the powers of hell
cannot prevail."

virginia made no answer, and the ghost wrung his hands in wild despair
as he looked down at her bowed golden head. suddenly she stood up, very
pale, and with a strange light in her eyes. "i am not afraid," she said
firmly, "and i will ask the angel to have mercy on you."

he rose from his seat with a faint cry of joy, and taking her hand bent
over it with old-fashioned grace and kissed it. his fingers were as cold
as ice, and his lips burned like fire, but virginia did not falter, as
he led her across the dusky room. on the faded green tapestry were
broidered little huntsmen. they blew their tasselled horns and with
their tiny hands waved to her to go back. "go back! little virginia,"
they cried, "go back!" but the ghost clutched her hand more tightly,
and she shut her eyes against them. horrible animals with lizard tails
and goggle eyes blinked at her from the carven chimneypiece, and
murmured, "beware! little virginia, beware! we may never see you again,"
but the ghost glided on more swiftly, and virginia did not listen. when
they reached the end of the room he stopped, and muttered some words she
could not understand. she opened her eyes, and saw the wall slowly
fading away like a mist, and a great black cavern in front of her. a
bitter cold wind swept round them, and she felt something pulling at her
dress. "quick, quick," cried the ghost, "or it will be too late," and
in a moment the wainscoting had closed behind them, and the tapestry
chamber was empty.

[illustration: "the ghost glided on more swiftly"]




vi


about ten minutes later, the bell rang for tea, and, as virginia did not
come down, mrs. otis sent up one of the footmen to tell her. after a
little time he returned and said that he could not find miss virginia
anywhere. as she was in the habit of going out to the garden every
evening to get flowers for the dinner-table, mrs. otis was not at all
alarmed at first, but when six o'clock struck, and virginia did not
appear, she became really agitated, and sent the boys out to look for
her, while she herself and mr. otis searched every room in the house. at
half-past six the boys came back and said that they could find no trace
of their sister anywhere. they were all now in the greatest state of
excitement, and did not know what to do, when mr. otis suddenly
remembered that, some few days before, he had given a band of gipsies
permission to camp in the park. he accordingly at once set off for
blackfell hollow, where he knew they were, accompanied by his eldest son
and two of the farm-servants. the little duke of cheshire, who was
perfectly frantic with anxiety, begged hard to be allowed to go too,
but mr. otis would not allow him, as he was afraid there might be a
scuffle. on arriving at the spot, however, he found that the gipsies had
gone, and it was evident that their departure had been rather sudden, as
the fire was still burning, and some plates were lying on the grass.
having sent off washington and the two men to scour the district, he ran
home, and despatched telegrams to all the police inspectors in the
county, telling them to look out for a little girl who had been
kidnapped by tramps or gipsies. he then ordered his horse to be brought
round, and, after insisting on his wife and the three boys sitting down
to dinner, rode off down the ascot road with a groom. he had hardly,
however, gone a couple of miles, when he heard somebody galloping after
him, and, looking round, saw the little duke coming up on his pony, with
his face very flushed, and no hat. "i'm awfully sorry, mr. otis," gasped
out the boy, "but i can't eat any dinner as long as virginia is lost.
please don't be angry with me; if you had let us be engaged last year,
there would never have been all this trouble. you won't send me back,
will you? i can't go! i won't go!"

[illustration: "he heard somebody galloping after him"]

the minister could not help smiling at the handsome young scapegrace,
and was a good deal touched at his devotion to virginia, so leaning down
from his horse, he patted him kindly on the shoulders, and said, "well,
cecil, if you won't go back, i suppose you must come with me, but i must
get you a hat at ascot."

"oh, bother my hat! i want virginia!" cried the little duke, laughing,
and they galloped on to the railway station. there mr. otis inquired of
the station-master if any one answering to the description of virginia
had been seen on the platform, but could get no news of her. the
station-master, however, wired up and down the line, and assured him
that a strict watch would be kept for her, and, after having bought a
hat for the little duke from a linen-draper, who was just putting up his
shutters, mr. otis rode off to bexley, a village about four miles away,
which he was told was a well-known haunt of the gipsies, as there was a
large common next to it. here they roused up the rural policeman, but
could get no information from him, and, after riding all over the
common, they turned their horses' heads homewards, and reached the chase
about eleven o'clock, dead-tired and almost heart-broken. they found
washington and the twins waiting for them at the gate-house with
lanterns, as the avenue was very dark. not the slightest trace of
virginia had been discovered. the gipsies had been caught on brockley
meadows, but she was not with them, and they had explained their sudden
departure by saying that they had mistaken the date of chorton fair, and
had gone off in a hurry for fear they should be late. indeed, they had
been quite distressed at hearing of virginia's disappearance, as they
were very grateful to mr. otis for having allowed them to camp in his
park, and four of their number had stayed behind to help in the search.
the carp-pond had been dragged, and the whole chase thoroughly gone
over, but without any result. it was evident that, for that night at any
rate, virginia was lost to them; and it was in a state of the deepest
depression that mr. otis and the boys walked up to the house, the groom
following behind with the two horses and the pony. in the hall they
found a group of frightened servants, and lying on a sofa in the library
was poor mrs. otis, almost out of her mind with terror and anxiety, and
having her forehead bathed with eau de cologne by the old housekeeper.
mr. otis at once insisted on her having something to eat, and ordered up
supper for the whole party. it was a melancholy meal, as hardly any one
spoke, and even the twins were awestruck and subdued, as they were very
fond of their sister. when they had finished, mr. otis, in spite of the
entreaties of the little duke, ordered them all to bed, saying that
nothing more could be done that night, and that he would telegraph in
the morning to scotland yard for some detectives to be sent down
immediately. just as they were passing out of the dining-room, midnight
began to boom from the clock tower, and when the last stroke sounded
they heard a crash and a sudden shrill cry; a dreadful peal of thunder
shook the house, a strain of unearthly music floated through the air, a
panel at the top of the staircase flew back with a loud noise, and out
on the landing, looking very pale and white, with a little casket in her
hand, stepped virginia. in a moment they had all rushed up to her. mrs.
otis clasped her passionately in her arms, the duke smothered her with
violent kisses, and the twins executed a wild war-dance round the group.

[illustration: "out on the landing stepped virginia"]

"good heavens! child, where have you been?" said mr. otis, rather
angrily, thinking that she had been playing some foolish trick on them.
"cecil and i have been riding all over the country looking for you, and
your mother has been frightened to death. you must never play these
practical jokes any more."

"except on the ghost! except on the ghost!" shrieked the twins, as they
capered about.

"my own darling, thank god you are found; you must never leave my side
again," murmured mrs. otis, as she kissed the trembling child, and
smoothed the tangled gold of her hair.

"papa," said virginia, quietly, "i have been with the ghost. he is dead,
and you must come and see him. he had been very wicked, but he was
really sorry for all that he had done, and he gave me this box of
beautiful jewels before he died."

the whole family gazed at her in mute amazement, but she was quite grave
and serious; and, turning round, she led them through the opening in the
wainscoting down a narrow secret corridor, washington following with a
lighted candle, which he had caught up from the table. finally, they
came to a great oak door, studded with rusty nails. when virginia
touched it, it swung back on its heavy hinges, and they found themselves
in a little low room, with a vaulted ceiling, and one tiny grated
window. imbedded in the wall was a huge iron ring, and chained to it was
a gaunt skeleton, that was stretched out at full length on the stone
floor, and seemed to be trying to grasp with its long fleshless fingers
an old-fashioned trencher and ewer, that were placed just out of its
reach. the jug had evidently been once filled with water, as it was
covered inside with green mould. there was nothing on the trencher but
a pile of dust. virginia knelt down beside the skeleton, and, folding
her little hands together, began to pray silently, while the rest of the
party looked on in wonder at the terrible tragedy whose secret was now
disclosed to them.

[illustration: "chained to it was a gaunt skeleton"]

"hallo!" suddenly exclaimed one of the twins, who had been looking out
of the window to try and discover in what wing of the house the room was
situated. "hallo! the old withered almond-tree has blossomed. i can see
the flowers quite plainly in the moonlight."

"god has forgiven him," said virginia, gravely, as she rose to her feet,
and a beautiful light seemed to illumine her face.

"what an angel you are!" cried the young duke, and he put his arm round
her neck, and kissed her.





vii


[illustration: "by the side of the hearse and the coaches walked the
servants with lighted torches"]

four days after these curious incidents, a funeral started from
canterville chase at about eleven o'clock at night. the hearse was drawn
by eight black horses, each of which carried on its head a great tuft of
nodding ostrich-plumes, and the leaden coffin was covered by a rich
purple pall, on which was embroidered in gold the canterville
coat-of-arms. by the side of the hearse and the coaches walked the
servants with lighted torches, and the whole procession was wonderfully
impressive. lord canterville was the chief mourner, having come up
specially from wales to attend the funeral, and sat in the first
carriage along with little virginia. then came the united states
minister and his wife, then washington and the three boys, and in the
last carriage was mrs. umney. it was generally felt that, as she had
been frightened by the ghost for more than fifty years of her life, she
had a right to see the last of him. a deep grave had been dug in the
corner of the churchyard, just under the old yew-tree, and the service
was read in the most impressive manner by the rev. augustus dampier.
when the ceremony was over, the servants, according to an old custom
observed in the canterville family, extinguished their torches, and, as
the coffin was being lowered into the grave, virginia stepped forward,
and laid on it a large cross made of white and pink almond-blossoms. as
she did so, the moon came out from behind a cloud, and flooded with its
silent silver the little churchyard, and from a distant copse a
nightingale began to sing. she thought of the ghost's description of the
garden of death, her eyes became dim with tears, and she hardly spoke a
word during the drive home.

[illustration: "the moon came out from behind a cloud"]

the next morning, before lord canterville went up to town, mr. otis had
an interview with him on the subject of the jewels the ghost had given
to virginia. they were perfectly magnificent, especially a certain ruby
necklace with old venetian setting, which was really a superb specimen
of sixteenth-century work, and their value was so great that mr. otis
felt considerable scruples about allowing his daughter to accept them.

"my lord," he said, "i know that in this country mortmain is held to
apply to trinkets as well as to land, and it is quite clear to me that
these jewels are, or should be, heirlooms in your family. i must beg
you, accordingly, to take them to london with you, and to regard them
simply as a portion of your property which has been restored to you
under certain strange conditions. as for my daughter, she is merely a
child, and has as yet, i am glad to say, but little interest in such
appurtenances of idle luxury. i am also informed by mrs. otis, who, i
may say, is no mean authority upon art,--having had the privilege of
spending several winters in boston when she was a girl,--that these gems
are of great monetary worth, and if offered for sale would fetch a tall
price. under these circumstances, lord canterville, i feel sure that you
will recognize how impossible it would be for me to allow them to remain
in the possession of any member of my family; and, indeed, all such
vain gauds and toys, however suitable or necessary to the dignity of the
british aristocracy, would be completely out of place among those who
have been brought up on the severe, and i believe immortal, principles
of republican simplicity. perhaps i should mention that virginia is very
anxious that you should allow her to retain the box, as a memento of
your unfortunate but misguided ancestor. as it is extremely old, and
consequently a good deal out of repair, you may perhaps think fit to
comply with her request. for my own part, i confess i am a good deal
surprised to find a child of mine expressing sympathy with mediævalism
in any form, and can only account for it by the fact that virginia was
born in one of your london suburbs shortly after mrs. otis had returned
from a trip to athens."

lord canterville listened very gravely to the worthy minister's speech,
pulling his grey moustache now and then to hide an involuntary smile,
and when mr. otis had ended, he shook him cordially by the hand, and
said: "my dear sir, your charming little daughter rendered my unlucky
ancestor, sir simon, a very important service, and i and my family are
much indebted to her for her marvellous courage and pluck. the jewels
are clearly hers, and, egad, i believe that if i were heartless enough
to take them from her, the wicked old fellow would be out of his grave
in a fortnight, leading me the devil of a life. as for their being
heirlooms, nothing is an heirloom that is not so mentioned in a will or
legal document, and the existence of these jewels has been quite
unknown. i assure you i have no more claim on them than your butler, and
when miss virginia grows up, i dare say she will be pleased to have
pretty things to wear. besides, you forget, mr. otis, that you took the
furniture and the ghost at a valuation, and anything that belonged to
the ghost passed at once into your possession, as, whatever activity
sir simon may have shown in the corridor at night, in point of law he
was really dead, and you acquired his property by purchase."

mr. otis was a good deal distressed at lord canterville's refusal, and
begged him to reconsider his decision, but the good-natured peer was
quite firm, and finally induced the minister to allow his daughter to
retain the present the ghost had given her, and when, in the spring of
1890, the young duchess of cheshire was presented at the queen's first
drawing-room on the occasion of her marriage, her jewels were the
universal theme of admiration. for virginia received the coronet, which
is the reward of all good little american girls, and was married to her
boy-lover as soon as he came of age. they were both so charming, and
they loved each other so much, that every one was delighted at the
match, except the old marchioness of dumbleton, who had tried to catch
the duke for one of her seven unmarried daughters, and had given no less
than three expensive dinner-parties for that purpose, and, strange to
say, mr. otis himself. mr. otis was extremely fond of the young duke
personally, but, theoretically, he objected to titles, and, to use his
own words, "was not without apprehension lest, amid the enervating
influences of a pleasure-loving aristocracy, the true principles of
republican simplicity should be forgotten." his objections, however,
were completely overruled, and i believe that when he walked up the
aisle of st. george's, hanover square, with his daughter leaning on his
arm, there was not a prouder man in the whole length and breadth of
england.

the duke and duchess, after the honeymoon was over, went down to
canterville chase, and on the day after their arrival they walked over
in the afternoon to the lonely churchyard by the pine-woods. there had
been a great deal of difficulty at first about the inscription on sir
simon's tombstone, but finally it had been decided to engrave on it
simply the initials of the old gentleman's name, and the verse from the
library window. the duchess had brought with her some lovely roses,
which she strewed upon the grave, and after they had stood by it for
some time they strolled into the ruined chancel of the old abbey. there
the duchess sat down on a fallen pillar, while her husband lay at her
feet smoking a cigarette and looking up at her beautiful eyes. suddenly
he threw his cigarette away, took hold of her hand, and said to her,
"virginia, a wife should have no secrets from her husband."

"dear cecil! i have no secrets from you."

"yes, you have," he answered, smiling, "you have never told me what
happened to you when you were locked up with the ghost."

"i have never told any one, cecil," said virginia, gravely.

"i know that, but you might tell me."

"please don't ask me, cecil, i cannot tell you. poor sir simon! i owe
him a great deal. yes, don't laugh, cecil, i really do. he made me see
what life is, and what death signifies, and why love is stronger than
both."

the duke rose and kissed his wife lovingly.

"you can have your secret as long as i have your heart," he murmured.

"you have always had that, cecil."

"and you will tell our children some day, won't you?"

virginia blushed.


<|EndOfText|>

chapter 1

the studio was filled with the rich odour of roses, and when the light
summer wind stirred amidst the trees of the garden, there came through
the open door the heavy scent of the lilac, or the more delicate
perfume of the pink-flowering thorn.

from the corner of the divan of persian saddle-bags on which he was
lying, smoking, as was his custom, innumerable cigarettes, lord henry
wotton could just catch the gleam of the honey-sweet and honey-coloured
blossoms of a laburnum, whose tremulous branches seemed hardly able to
bear the burden of a beauty so flamelike as theirs; and now and then
the fantastic shadows of birds in flight flitted across the long
tussore-silk curtains that were stretched in front of the huge window,
producing a kind of momentary japanese effect, and making him think of
those pallid, jade-faced painters of tokyo who, through the medium of
an art that is necessarily immobile, seek to convey the sense of
swiftness and motion.  the sullen murmur of the bees shouldering their
way through the long unmown grass, or circling with monotonous
insistence round the dusty gilt horns of the straggling woodbine,
seemed to make the stillness more oppressive.  the dim roar of london
was like the bourdon note of a distant organ.

in the centre of the room, clamped to an upright easel, stood the
full-length portrait of a young man of extraordinary personal beauty,
and in front of it, some little distance away, was sitting the artist
himself, basil hallward, whose sudden disappearance some years ago
caused, at the time, such public excitement and gave rise to so many
strange conjectures.

as the painter looked at the gracious and comely form he had so
skilfully mirrored in his art, a smile of pleasure passed across his
face, and seemed about to linger there.  but he suddenly started up,
and closing his eyes, placed his fingers upon the lids, as though he
sought to imprison within his brain some curious dream from which he
feared he might awake.

"it is your best work, basil, the best thing you have ever done," said
lord henry languidly.  "you must certainly send it next year to the
grosvenor.  the academy is too large and too vulgar.  whenever i have
gone there, there have been either so many people that i have not been
able to see the pictures, which was dreadful, or so many pictures that
i have not been able to see the people, which was worse.  the grosvenor
is really the only place."

"i don't think i shall send it anywhere," he answered, tossing his head
back in that odd way that used to make his friends laugh at him at
oxford.  "no, i won't send it anywhere."

lord henry elevated his eyebrows and looked at him in amazement through
the thin blue wreaths of smoke that curled up in such fanciful whorls
from his heavy, opium-tainted cigarette.  "not send it anywhere?  my
dear fellow, why?  have you any reason?  what odd chaps you painters
are!  you do anything in the world to gain a reputation.  as soon as
you have one, you seem to want to throw it away.  it is silly of you,
for there is only one thing in the world worse than being talked about,
and that is not being talked about.  a portrait like this would set you
far above all the young men in england, and make the old men quite
jealous, if old men are ever capable of any emotion."

"i know you will laugh at me," he replied, "but i really can't exhibit
it.  i have put too much of myself into it."

lord henry stretched himself out on the divan and laughed.

"yes, i knew you would; but it is quite true, all the same."

"too much of yourself in it! upon my word, basil, i didn't know you
were so vain; and i really can't see any resemblance between you, with
your rugged strong face and your coal-black hair, and this young
adonis, who looks as if he was made out of ivory and rose-leaves. why,
my dear basil, he is a narcissus, and you--well, of course you have an
intellectual expression and all that.  but beauty, real beauty, ends
where an intellectual expression begins.  intellect is in itself a mode
of exaggeration, and destroys the harmony of any face.  the moment one
sits down to think, one becomes all nose, or all forehead, or something
horrid.  look at the successful men in any of the learned professions.
how perfectly hideous they are!  except, of course, in the church.  but
then in the church they don't think.  a bishop keeps on saying at the
age of eighty what he was told to say when he was a boy of eighteen,
and as a natural consequence he always looks absolutely delightful.
your mysterious young friend, whose name you have never told me, but
whose picture really fascinates me, never thinks.  i feel quite sure of
that.  he is some brainless beautiful creature who should be always
here in winter when we have no flowers to look at, and always here in
summer when we want something to chill our intelligence.  don't flatter
yourself, basil:  you are not in the least like him."

"you don't understand me, harry," answered the artist.  "of course i am
not like him.  i know that perfectly well.  indeed, i should be sorry
to look like him.  you shrug your shoulders?  i am telling you the
truth.  there is a fatality about all physical and intellectual
distinction, the sort of fatality that seems to dog through history the
faltering steps of kings.  it is better not to be different from one's
fellows.  the ugly and the stupid have the best of it in this world.
they can sit at their ease and gape at the play.  if they know nothing
of victory, they are at least spared the knowledge of defeat.  they
live as we all should live--undisturbed, indifferent, and without
disquiet.  they neither bring ruin upon others, nor ever receive it
from alien hands.  your rank and wealth, harry; my brains, such as they
are--my art, whatever it may be worth; dorian gray's good looks--we
shall all suffer for what the gods have given us, suffer terribly."

"dorian gray?  is that his name?" asked lord henry, walking across the
studio towards basil hallward.

"yes, that is his name.  i didn't intend to tell it to you."

"but why not?"

"oh, i can't explain.  when i like people immensely, i never tell their
names to any one.  it is like surrendering a part of them.  i have
grown to love secrecy.  it seems to be the one thing that can make
modern life mysterious or marvellous to us.  the commonest thing is
delightful if one only hides it.  when i leave town now i never tell my
people where i am going.  if i did, i would lose all my pleasure.  it
is a silly habit, i dare say, but somehow it seems to bring a great
deal of romance into one's life.  i suppose you think me awfully
foolish about it?"

"not at all," answered lord henry, "not at all, my dear basil.  you
seem to forget that i am married, and the one charm of marriage is that
it makes a life of deception absolutely necessary for both parties.  i
never know where my wife is, and my wife never knows what i am doing.
when we meet--we do meet occasionally, when we dine out together, or go
down to the duke's--we tell each other the most absurd stories with the
most serious faces.  my wife is very good at it--much better, in fact,
than i am.  she never gets confused over her dates, and i always do.
but when she does find me out, she makes no row at all.  i sometimes
wish she would; but she merely laughs at me."

"i hate the way you talk about your married life, harry," said basil
hallward, strolling towards the door that led into the garden.  "i
believe that you are really a very good husband, but that you are
thoroughly ashamed of your own virtues.  you are an extraordinary
fellow.  you never say a moral thing, and you never do a wrong thing.
your cynicism is simply a pose."

"being natural is simply a pose, and the most irritating pose i know,"
cried lord henry, laughing; and the two young men went out into the
garden together and ensconced themselves on a long bamboo seat that
stood in the shade of a tall laurel bush.  the sunlight slipped over
the polished leaves.  in the grass, white daisies were tremulous.

after a pause, lord henry pulled out his watch.  "i am afraid i must be
going, basil," he murmured, "and before i go, i insist on your
answering a question i put to you some time ago."

"what is that?" said the painter, keeping his eyes fixed on the ground.

"you know quite well."

"i do not, harry."

"well, i will tell you what it is.  i want you to explain to me why you
won't exhibit dorian gray's picture.  i want the real reason."

"i told you the real reason."

"no, you did not.  you said it was because there was too much of
yourself in it.  now, that is childish."

"harry," said basil hallward, looking him straight in the face, "every
portrait that is painted with feeling is a portrait of the artist, not
of the sitter.  the sitter is merely the accident, the occasion.  it is
not he who is revealed by the painter; it is rather the painter who, on
the coloured canvas, reveals himself.  the reason i will not exhibit
this picture is that i am afraid that i have shown in it the secret of
my own soul."

lord henry laughed.  "and what is that?" he asked.

"i will tell you," said hallward; but an expression of perplexity came
over his face.

"i am all expectation, basil," continued his companion, glancing at him.

"oh, there is really very little to tell, harry," answered the painter;
"and i am afraid you will hardly understand it.  perhaps you will
hardly believe it."

lord henry smiled, and leaning down, plucked a pink-petalled daisy from
the grass and examined it.  "i am quite sure i shall understand it," he
replied, gazing intently at the little golden, white-feathered disk,
"and as for believing things, i can believe anything, provided that it
is quite incredible."

the wind shook some blossoms from the trees, and the heavy
lilac-blooms, with their clustering stars, moved to and fro in the
languid air.  a grasshopper began to chirrup by the wall, and like a
blue thread a long thin dragon-fly floated past on its brown gauze
wings.  lord henry felt as if he could hear basil hallward's heart
beating, and wondered what was coming.

"the story is simply this," said the painter after some time.  "two
months ago i went to a crush at lady brandon's. you know we poor
artists have to show ourselves in society from time to time, just to
remind the public that we are not savages.  with an evening coat and a
white tie, as you told me once, anybody, even a stock-broker, can gain
a reputation for being civilized.  well, after i had been in the room
about ten minutes, talking to huge overdressed dowagers and tedious
academicians, i suddenly became conscious that some one was looking at
me.  i turned half-way round and saw dorian gray for the first time.
when our eyes met, i felt that i was growing pale.  a curious sensation
of terror came over me.  i knew that i had come face to face with some
one whose mere personality was so fascinating that, if i allowed it to
do so, it would absorb my whole nature, my whole soul, my very art
itself.  i did not want any external influence in my life.  you know
yourself, harry, how independent i am by nature.  i have always been my
own master; had at least always been so, till i met dorian gray.
then--but i don't know how to explain it to you.  something seemed to
tell me that i was on the verge of a terrible crisis in my life.  i had
a strange feeling that fate had in store for me exquisite joys and
exquisite sorrows.  i grew afraid and turned to quit the room.  it was
not conscience that made me do so:  it was a sort of cowardice.  i take
no credit to myself for trying to escape."

"conscience and cowardice are really the same things, basil.
conscience is the trade-name of the firm.  that is all."

"i don't believe that, harry, and i don't believe you do either.
however, whatever was my motive--and it may have been pride, for i used
to be very proud--i certainly struggled to the door.  there, of course,
i stumbled against lady brandon.  'you are not going to run away so
soon, mr. hallward?' she screamed out.  you know her curiously shrill
voice?"

"yes; she is a peacock in everything but beauty," said lord henry,
pulling the daisy to bits with his long nervous fingers.

"i could not get rid of her.  she brought me up to royalties, and
people with stars and garters, and elderly ladies with gigantic tiaras
and parrot noses.  she spoke of me as her dearest friend.  i had only
met her once before, but she took it into her head to lionize me.  i
believe some picture of mine had made a great success at the time, at
least had been chattered about in the penny newspapers, which is the
nineteenth-century standard of immortality.  suddenly i found myself
face to face with the young man whose personality had so strangely
stirred me.  we were quite close, almost touching.  our eyes met again.
it was reckless of me, but i asked lady brandon to introduce me to him.
perhaps it was not so reckless, after all.  it was simply inevitable.
we would have spoken to each other without any introduction.  i am sure
of that.  dorian told me so afterwards.  he, too, felt that we were
destined to know each other."

"and how did lady brandon describe this wonderful young man?" asked his
companion.  "i know she goes in for giving a rapid _precis_ of all her
guests.  i remember her bringing me up to a truculent and red-faced old
gentleman covered all over with orders and ribbons, and hissing into my
ear, in a tragic whisper which must have been perfectly audible to
everybody in the room, the most astounding details.  i simply fled.  i
like to find out people for myself.  but lady brandon treats her guests
exactly as an auctioneer treats his goods.  she either explains them
entirely away, or tells one everything about them except what one wants
to know."

"poor lady brandon!  you are hard on her, harry!" said hallward
listlessly.

"my dear fellow, she tried to found a _salon_, and only succeeded in
opening a restaurant.  how could i admire her?  but tell me, what did
she say about mr. dorian gray?"

"oh, something like, 'charming boy--poor dear mother and i absolutely
inseparable.  quite forget what he does--afraid he--doesn't do
anything--oh, yes, plays the piano--or is it the violin, dear mr.
gray?'  neither of us could help laughing, and we became friends at
once."

"laughter is not at all a bad beginning for a friendship, and it is far
the best ending for one," said the young lord, plucking another daisy.

hallward shook his head.  "you don't understand what friendship is,
harry," he murmured--"or what enmity is, for that matter.  you like
every one; that is to say, you are indifferent to every one."

"how horribly unjust of you!" cried lord henry, tilting his hat back
and looking up at the little clouds that, like ravelled skeins of
glossy white silk, were drifting across the hollowed turquoise of the
summer sky.  "yes; horribly unjust of you.  i make a great difference
between people.  i choose my friends for their good looks, my
acquaintances for their good characters, and my enemies for their good
intellects.  a man cannot be too careful in the choice of his enemies.
i have not got one who is a fool.  they are all men of some
intellectual power, and consequently they all appreciate me.  is that
very vain of me?  i think it is rather vain."

"i should think it was, harry.  but according to your category i must
be merely an acquaintance."

"my dear old basil, you are much more than an acquaintance."

"and much less than a friend.  a sort of brother, i suppose?"

"oh, brothers!  i don't care for brothers.  my elder brother won't die,
and my younger brothers seem never to do anything else."

"harry!" exclaimed hallward, frowning.

"my dear fellow, i am not quite serious.  but i can't help detesting my
relations.  i suppose it comes from the fact that none of us can stand
other people having the same faults as ourselves.  i quite sympathize
with the rage of the english democracy against what they call the vices
of the upper orders.  the masses feel that drunkenness, stupidity, and
immorality should be their own special property, and that if any one of
us makes an ass of himself, he is poaching on their preserves.  when
poor southwark got into the divorce court, their indignation was quite
magnificent.  and yet i don't suppose that ten per cent of the
proletariat live correctly."

"i don't agree with a single word that you have said, and, what is
more, harry, i feel sure you don't either."

lord henry stroked his pointed brown beard and tapped the toe of his
patent-leather boot with a tasselled ebony cane.  "how english you are
basil!  that is the second time you have made that observation.  if one
puts forward an idea to a true englishman--always a rash thing to
do--he never dreams of considering whether the idea is right or wrong.
the only thing he considers of any importance is whether one believes
it oneself.  now, the value of an idea has nothing whatsoever to do
with the sincerity of the man who expresses it.  indeed, the
probabilities are that the more insincere the man is, the more purely
intellectual will the idea be, as in that case it will not be coloured
by either his wants, his desires, or his prejudices.  however, i don't
propose to discuss politics, sociology, or metaphysics with you.  i
like persons better than principles, and i like persons with no
principles better than anything else in the world.  tell me more about
mr. dorian gray.  how often do you see him?"

"every day.  i couldn't be happy if i didn't see him every day.  he is
absolutely necessary to me."

"how extraordinary!  i thought you would never care for anything but
your art."

"he is all my art to me now," said the painter gravely.  "i sometimes
think, harry, that there are only two eras of any importance in the
world's history.  the first is the appearance of a new medium for art,
and the second is the appearance of a new personality for art also.
what the invention of oil-painting was to the venetians, the face of
antinous was to late greek sculpture, and the face of dorian gray will
some day be to me.  it is not merely that i paint from him, draw from
him, sketch from him.  of course, i have done all that.  but he is much
more to me than a model or a sitter.  i won't tell you that i am
dissatisfied with what i have done of him, or that his beauty is such
that art cannot express it.  there is nothing that art cannot express,
and i know that the work i have done, since i met dorian gray, is good
work, is the best work of my life.  but in some curious way--i wonder
will you understand me?--his personality has suggested to me an
entirely new manner in art, an entirely new mode of style.  i see
things differently, i think of them differently.  i can now recreate
life in a way that was hidden from me before.  'a dream of form in days
of thought'--who is it who says that?  i forget; but it is what dorian
gray has been to me.  the merely visible presence of this lad--for he
seems to me little more than a lad, though he is really over
twenty--his merely visible presence--ah!  i wonder can you realize all
that that means?  unconsciously he defines for me the lines of a fresh
school, a school that is to have in it all the passion of the romantic
spirit, all the perfection of the spirit that is greek.  the harmony of
soul and body--how much that is!  we in our madness have separated the
two, and have invented a realism that is vulgar, an ideality that is
void.  harry! if you only knew what dorian gray is to me!  you remember
that landscape of mine, for which agnew offered me such a huge price
but which i would not part with?  it is one of the best things i have
ever done.  and why is it so?  because, while i was painting it, dorian
gray sat beside me.  some subtle influence passed from him to me, and
for the first time in my life i saw in the plain woodland the wonder i
had always looked for and always missed."

"basil, this is extraordinary!  i must see dorian gray."

hallward got up from the seat and walked up and down the garden.  after
some time he came back.  "harry," he said, "dorian gray is to me simply
a motive in art.  you might see nothing in him.  i see everything in
him.  he is never more present in my work than when no image of him is
there.  he is a suggestion, as i have said, of a new manner.  i find
him in the curves of certain lines, in the loveliness and subtleties of
certain colours.  that is all."

"then why won't you exhibit his portrait?" asked lord henry.

"because, without intending it, i have put into it some expression of
all this curious artistic idolatry, of which, of course, i have never
cared to speak to him.  he knows nothing about it.  he shall never know
anything about it.  but the world might guess it, and i will not bare
my soul to their shallow prying eyes.  my heart shall never be put
under their microscope.  there is too much of myself in the thing,
harry--too much of myself!"

"poets are not so scrupulous as you are.  they know how useful passion
is for publication.  nowadays a broken heart will run to many editions."

"i hate them for it," cried hallward.  "an artist should create
beautiful things, but should put nothing of his own life into them.  we
live in an age when men treat art as if it were meant to be a form of
autobiography.  we have lost the abstract sense of beauty.  some day i
will show the world what it is; and for that reason the world shall
never see my portrait of dorian gray."

"i think you are wrong, basil, but i won't argue with you.  it is only
the intellectually lost who ever argue.  tell me, is dorian gray very
fond of you?"

the painter considered for a few moments.  "he likes me," he answered
after a pause; "i know he likes me.  of course i flatter him
dreadfully.  i find a strange pleasure in saying things to him that i
know i shall be sorry for having said.  as a rule, he is charming to
me, and we sit in the studio and talk of a thousand things.  now and
then, however, he is horribly thoughtless, and seems to take a real
delight in giving me pain.  then i feel, harry, that i have given away
my whole soul to some one who treats it as if it were a flower to put
in his coat, a bit of decoration to charm his vanity, an ornament for a
summer's day."

"days in summer, basil, are apt to linger," murmured lord henry.
"perhaps you will tire sooner than he will.  it is a sad thing to think
of, but there is no doubt that genius lasts longer than beauty.  that
accounts for the fact that we all take such pains to over-educate
ourselves.  in the wild struggle for existence, we want to have
something that endures, and so we fill our minds with rubbish and
facts, in the silly hope of keeping our place.  the thoroughly
well-informed man--that is the modern ideal.  and the mind of the
thoroughly well-informed man is a dreadful thing.  it is like a
_bric-a-brac_ shop, all monsters and dust, with everything priced above
its proper value.  i think you will tire first, all the same.  some day
you will look at your friend, and he will seem to you to be a little
out of drawing, or you won't like his tone of colour, or something.
you will bitterly reproach him in your own heart, and seriously think
that he has behaved very badly to you.  the next time he calls, you
will be perfectly cold and indifferent.  it will be a great pity, for
it will alter you.  what you have told me is quite a romance, a romance
of art one might call it, and the worst of having a romance of any kind
is that it leaves one so unromantic."

"harry, don't talk like that.  as long as i live, the personality of
dorian gray will dominate me.  you can't feel what i feel.  you change
too often."

"ah, my dear basil, that is exactly why i can feel it.  those who are
faithful know only the trivial side of love: it is the faithless who
know love's tragedies."  and lord henry struck a light on a dainty
silver case and began to smoke a cigarette with a self-conscious and
satisfied air, as if he had summed up the world in a phrase.  there was
a rustle of chirruping sparrows in the green lacquer leaves of the ivy,
and the blue cloud-shadows chased themselves across the grass like
swallows.  how pleasant it was in the garden!  and how delightful other
people's emotions were!--much more delightful than their ideas, it
seemed to him.  one's own soul, and the passions of one's
friends--those were the fascinating things in life.  he pictured to
himself with silent amusement the tedious luncheon that he had missed
by staying so long with basil hallward.  had he gone to his aunt's, he
would have been sure to have met lord goodbody there, and the whole
conversation would have been about the feeding of the poor and the
necessity for model lodging-houses. each class would have preached the
importance of those virtues, for whose exercise there was no necessity
in their own lives.  the rich would have spoken on the value of thrift,
and the idle grown eloquent over the dignity of labour.  it was
charming to have escaped all that!  as he thought of his aunt, an idea
seemed to strike him.  he turned to hallward and said, "my dear fellow,
i have just remembered."

"remembered what, harry?"

"where i heard the name of dorian gray."

"where was it?" asked hallward, with a slight frown.

"don't look so angry, basil.  it was at my aunt, lady agatha's.  she
told me she had discovered a wonderful young man who was going to help
her in the east end, and that his name was dorian gray.  i am bound to
state that she never told me he was good-looking. women have no
appreciation of good looks; at least, good women have not.  she said
that he was very earnest and had a beautiful nature.  i at once
pictured to myself a creature with spectacles and lank hair, horribly
freckled, and tramping about on huge feet.  i wish i had known it was
your friend."

"i am very glad you didn't, harry."

"why?"

"i don't want you to meet him."

"you don't want me to meet him?"

"no."

"mr. dorian gray is in the studio, sir," said the butler, coming into
the garden.

"you must introduce me now," cried lord henry, laughing.

the painter turned to his servant, who stood blinking in the sunlight.
"ask mr. gray to wait, parker:  i shall be in in a few moments." the
man bowed and went up the walk.

then he looked at lord henry.  "dorian gray is my dearest friend," he
said.  "he has a simple and a beautiful nature.  your aunt was quite
right in what she said of him.  don't spoil him.  don't try to
influence him.  your influence would be bad.  the world is wide, and
has many marvellous people in it.  don't take away from me the one
person who gives to my art whatever charm it possesses:  my life as an
artist depends on him.  mind, harry, i trust you."  he spoke very
slowly, and the words seemed wrung out of him almost against his will.

"what nonsense you talk!" said lord henry, smiling, and taking hallward
by the arm, he almost led him into the house.



chapter 2

as they entered they saw dorian gray.  he was seated at the piano, with
his back to them, turning over the pages of a volume of schumann's
"forest scenes."  "you must lend me these, basil," he cried.  "i want
to learn them.  they are perfectly charming."

"that entirely depends on how you sit to-day, dorian."

"oh, i am tired of sitting, and i don't want a life-sized portrait of
myself," answered the lad, swinging round on the music-stool in a
wilful, petulant manner.  when he caught sight of lord henry, a faint
blush coloured his cheeks for a moment, and he started up.  "i beg your
pardon, basil, but i didn't know you had any one with you."

"this is lord henry wotton, dorian, an old oxford friend of mine.  i
have just been telling him what a capital sitter you were, and now you
have spoiled everything."

"you have not spoiled my pleasure in meeting you, mr. gray," said lord
henry, stepping forward and extending his hand.  "my aunt has often
spoken to me about you.  you are one of her favourites, and, i am
afraid, one of her victims also."

"i am in lady agatha's black books at present," answered dorian with a
funny look of penitence.  "i promised to go to a club in whitechapel
with her last tuesday, and i really forgot all about it.  we were to
have played a duet together--three duets, i believe.  i don't know what
she will say to me.  i am far too frightened to call."

"oh, i will make your peace with my aunt.  she is quite devoted to you.
and i don't think it really matters about your not being there.  the
audience probably thought it was a duet.  when aunt agatha sits down to
the piano, she makes quite enough noise for two people."

"that is very horrid to her, and not very nice to me," answered dorian,
laughing.

lord henry looked at him.  yes, he was certainly wonderfully handsome,
with his finely curved scarlet lips, his frank blue eyes, his crisp
gold hair.  there was something in his face that made one trust him at
once.  all the candour of youth was there, as well as all youth's
passionate purity.  one felt that he had kept himself unspotted from
the world.  no wonder basil hallward worshipped him.

"you are too charming to go in for philanthropy, mr. gray--far too
charming." and lord henry flung himself down on the divan and opened
his cigarette-case.

the painter had been busy mixing his colours and getting his brushes
ready.  he was looking worried, and when he heard lord henry's last
remark, he glanced at him, hesitated for a moment, and then said,
"harry, i want to finish this picture to-day. would you think it
awfully rude of me if i asked you to go away?"

lord henry smiled and looked at dorian gray.  "am i to go, mr. gray?"
he asked.

"oh, please don't, lord henry.  i see that basil is in one of his sulky
moods, and i can't bear him when he sulks.  besides, i want you to tell
me why i should not go in for philanthropy."

"i don't know that i shall tell you that, mr. gray.  it is so tedious a
subject that one would have to talk seriously about it.  but i
certainly shall not run away, now that you have asked me to stop.  you
don't really mind, basil, do you?  you have often told me that you
liked your sitters to have some one to chat to."

hallward bit his lip.  "if dorian wishes it, of course you must stay.
dorian's whims are laws to everybody, except himself."

lord henry took up his hat and gloves.  "you are very pressing, basil,
but i am afraid i must go.  i have promised to meet a man at the
orleans.  good-bye, mr. gray.  come and see me some afternoon in curzon
street.  i am nearly always at home at five o'clock. write to me when
you are coming.  i should be sorry to miss you."

"basil," cried dorian gray, "if lord henry wotton goes, i shall go,
too.  you never open your lips while you are painting, and it is
horribly dull standing on a platform and trying to look pleasant.  ask
him to stay.  i insist upon it."

"stay, harry, to oblige dorian, and to oblige me," said hallward,
gazing intently at his picture.  "it is quite true, i never talk when i
am working, and never listen either, and it must be dreadfully tedious
for my unfortunate sitters.  i beg you to stay."

"but what about my man at the orleans?"

the painter laughed.  "i don't think there will be any difficulty about
that.  sit down again, harry.  and now, dorian, get up on the platform,
and don't move about too much, or pay any attention to what lord henry
says.  he has a very bad influence over all his friends, with the
single exception of myself."

dorian gray stepped up on the dais with the air of a young greek
martyr, and made a little _moue_ of discontent to lord henry, to whom he
had rather taken a fancy.  he was so unlike basil.  they made a
delightful contrast.  and he had such a beautiful voice.  after a few
moments he said to him, "have you really a very bad influence, lord
henry?  as bad as basil says?"

"there is no such thing as a good influence, mr. gray.  all influence
is immoral--immoral from the scientific point of view."

"why?"

"because to influence a person is to give him one's own soul.  he does
not think his natural thoughts, or burn with his natural passions.  his
virtues are not real to him.  his sins, if there are such things as
sins, are borrowed.  he becomes an echo of some one else's music, an
actor of a part that has not been written for him.  the aim of life is
self-development. to realize one's nature perfectly--that is what each
of us is here for.  people are afraid of themselves, nowadays.  they
have forgotten the highest of all duties, the duty that one owes to
one's self.  of course, they are charitable.  they feed the hungry and
clothe the beggar.  but their own souls starve, and are naked.  courage
has gone out of our race.  perhaps we never really had it.  the terror
of society, which is the basis of morals, the terror of god, which is
the secret of religion--these are the two things that govern us.  and
yet--"

"just turn your head a little more to the right, dorian, like a good
boy," said the painter, deep in his work and conscious only that a look
had come into the lad's face that he had never seen there before.

"and yet," continued lord henry, in his low, musical voice, and with
that graceful wave of the hand that was always so characteristic of
him, and that he had even in his eton days, "i believe that if one man
were to live out his life fully and completely, were to give form to
every feeling, expression to every thought, reality to every dream--i
believe that the world would gain such a fresh impulse of joy that we
would forget all the maladies of mediaevalism, and return to the
hellenic ideal--to something finer, richer than the hellenic ideal, it
may be.  but the bravest man amongst us is afraid of himself.  the
mutilation of the savage has its tragic survival in the self-denial
that mars our lives.  we are punished for our refusals.  every impulse
that we strive to strangle broods in the mind and poisons us.  the body
sins once, and has done with its sin, for action is a mode of
purification.  nothing remains then but the recollection of a pleasure,
or the luxury of a regret.  the only way to get rid of a temptation is
to yield to it.  resist it, and your soul grows sick with longing for
the things it has forbidden to itself, with desire for what its
monstrous laws have made monstrous and unlawful.  it has been said that
the great events of the world take place in the brain.  it is in the
brain, and the brain only, that the great sins of the world take place
also.  you, mr. gray, you yourself, with your rose-red youth and your
rose-white boyhood, you have had passions that have made you afraid,
thoughts that have filled you with terror, day-dreams and sleeping
dreams whose mere memory might stain your cheek with shame--"

"stop!" faltered dorian gray, "stop! you bewilder me.  i don't know
what to say.  there is some answer to you, but i cannot find it.  don't
speak.  let me think.  or, rather, let me try not to think."

for nearly ten minutes he stood there, motionless, with parted lips and
eyes strangely bright.  he was dimly conscious that entirely fresh
influences were at work within him.  yet they seemed to him to have
come really from himself.  the few words that basil's friend had said
to him--words spoken by chance, no doubt, and with wilful paradox in
them--had touched some secret chord that had never been touched before,
but that he felt was now vibrating and throbbing to curious pulses.

music had stirred him like that.  music had troubled him many times.
but music was not articulate.  it was not a new world, but rather
another chaos, that it created in us.  words!  mere words!  how
terrible they were!  how clear, and vivid, and cruel!  one could not
escape from them.  and yet what a subtle magic there was in them!  they
seemed to be able to give a plastic form to formless things, and to
have a music of their own as sweet as that of viol or of lute.  mere
words!  was there anything so real as words?

yes; there had been things in his boyhood that he had not understood.
he understood them now.  life suddenly became fiery-coloured to him.
it seemed to him that he had been walking in fire.  why had he not
known it?

with his subtle smile, lord henry watched him.  he knew the precise
psychological moment when to say nothing.  he felt intensely
interested.  he was amazed at the sudden impression that his words had
produced, and, remembering a book that he had read when he was sixteen,
a book which had revealed to him much that he had not known before, he
wondered whether dorian gray was passing through a similar experience.
he had merely shot an arrow into the air.  had it hit the mark?  how
fascinating the lad was!

hallward painted away with that marvellous bold touch of his, that had
the true refinement and perfect delicacy that in art, at any rate comes
only from strength.  he was unconscious of the silence.

"basil, i am tired of standing," cried dorian gray suddenly.  "i must
go out and sit in the garden.  the air is stifling here."

"my dear fellow, i am so sorry.  when i am painting, i can't think of
anything else.  but you never sat better.  you were perfectly still.
and i have caught the effect i wanted--the half-parted lips and the
bright look in the eyes.  i don't know what harry has been saying to
you, but he has certainly made you have the most wonderful expression.
i suppose he has been paying you compliments.  you mustn't believe a
word that he says."

"he has certainly not been paying me compliments.  perhaps that is the
reason that i don't believe anything he has told me."

"you know you believe it all," said lord henry, looking at him with his
dreamy languorous eyes.  "i will go out to the garden with you.  it is
horribly hot in the studio.  basil, let us have something iced to
drink, something with strawberries in it."

"certainly, harry.  just touch the bell, and when parker comes i will
tell him what you want.  i have got to work up this background, so i
will join you later on.  don't keep dorian too long.  i have never been
in better form for painting than i am to-day. this is going to be my
masterpiece.  it is my masterpiece as it stands."

lord henry went out to the garden and found dorian gray burying his
face in the great cool lilac-blossoms, feverishly drinking in their
perfume as if it had been wine.  he came close to him and put his hand
upon his shoulder.  "you are quite right to do that," he murmured.
"nothing can cure the soul but the senses, just as nothing can cure the
senses but the soul."

the lad started and drew back.  he was bareheaded, and the leaves had
tossed his rebellious curls and tangled all their gilded threads.
there was a look of fear in his eyes, such as people have when they are
suddenly awakened.  his finely chiselled nostrils quivered, and some
hidden nerve shook the scarlet of his lips and left them trembling.

"yes," continued lord henry, "that is one of the great secrets of
life--to cure the soul by means of the senses, and the senses by means
of the soul.  you are a wonderful creation.  you know more than you
think you know, just as you know less than you want to know."

dorian gray frowned and turned his head away.  he could not help liking
the tall, graceful young man who was standing by him.  his romantic,
olive-coloured face and worn expression interested him.  there was
something in his low languid voice that was absolutely fascinating.
his cool, white, flowerlike hands, even, had a curious charm.  they
moved, as he spoke, like music, and seemed to have a language of their
own.  but he felt afraid of him, and ashamed of being afraid.  why had
it been left for a stranger to reveal him to himself?  he had known
basil hallward for months, but the friendship between them had never
altered him.  suddenly there had come some one across his life who
seemed to have disclosed to him life's mystery.  and, yet, what was
there to be afraid of?  he was not a schoolboy or a girl.  it was
absurd to be frightened.

"let us go and sit in the shade," said lord henry.  "parker has brought
out the drinks, and if you stay any longer in this glare, you will be
quite spoiled, and basil will never paint you again.  you really must
not allow yourself to become sunburnt.  it would be unbecoming."

"what can it matter?" cried dorian gray, laughing, as he sat down on
the seat at the end of the garden.

"it should matter everything to you, mr. gray."

"why?"

"because you have the most marvellous youth, and youth is the one thing
worth having."

"i don't feel that, lord henry."

"no, you don't feel it now.  some day, when you are old and wrinkled
and ugly, when thought has seared your forehead with its lines, and
passion branded your lips with its hideous fires, you will feel it, you
will feel it terribly.  now, wherever you go, you charm the world.
will it always be so? ... you have a wonderfully beautiful face, mr.
gray.  don't frown.  you have.  and beauty is a form of genius--is
higher, indeed, than genius, as it needs no explanation.  it is of the
great facts of the world, like sunlight, or spring-time, or the
reflection in dark waters of that silver shell we call the moon.  it
cannot be questioned.  it has its divine right of sovereignty.  it
makes princes of those who have it.  you smile?  ah! when you have lost
it you won't smile.... people say sometimes that beauty is only
superficial.  that may be so, but at least it is not so superficial as
thought is.  to me, beauty is the wonder of wonders.  it is only
shallow people who do not judge by appearances.  the true mystery of
the world is the visible, not the invisible.... yes, mr. gray, the
gods have been good to you.  but what the gods give they quickly take
away.  you have only a few years in which to live really, perfectly,
and fully.  when your youth goes, your beauty will go with it, and then
you will suddenly discover that there are no triumphs left for you, or
have to content yourself with those mean triumphs that the memory of
your past will make more bitter than defeats.  every month as it wanes
brings you nearer to something dreadful.  time is jealous of you, and
wars against your lilies and your roses.  you will become sallow, and
hollow-cheeked, and dull-eyed.  you will suffer horribly.... ah!
realize your youth while you have it.  don't squander the gold of your
days, listening to the tedious, trying to improve the hopeless failure,
or giving away your life to the ignorant, the common, and the vulgar.
these are the sickly aims, the false ideals, of our age.  live!  live
the wonderful life that is in you!  let nothing be lost upon you.  be
always searching for new sensations.  be afraid of nothing.... a new
hedonism--that is what our century wants.  you might be its visible
symbol.  with your personality there is nothing you could not do.  the
world belongs to you for a season.... the moment i met you i saw that
you were quite unconscious of what you really are, of what you really
might be.  there was so much in you that charmed me that i felt i must
tell you something about yourself.  i thought how tragic it would be if
you were wasted.  for there is such a little time that your youth will
last--such a little time.  the common hill-flowers wither, but they
blossom again.  the laburnum will be as yellow next june as it is now.
in a month there will be purple stars on the clematis, and year after
year the green night of its leaves will hold its purple stars.  but we
never get back our youth.  the pulse of joy that beats in us at twenty
becomes sluggish.  our limbs fail, our senses rot.  we degenerate into
hideous puppets, haunted by the memory of the passions of which we were
too much afraid, and the exquisite temptations that we had not the
courage to yield to.  youth!  youth!  there is absolutely nothing in
the world but youth!"

dorian gray listened, open-eyed and wondering.  the spray of lilac fell
from his hand upon the gravel.  a furry bee came and buzzed round it
for a moment.  then it began to scramble all over the oval stellated
globe of the tiny blossoms.  he watched it with that strange interest
in trivial things that we try to develop when things of high import
make us afraid, or when we are stirred by some new emotion for which we
cannot find expression, or when some thought that terrifies us lays
sudden siege to the brain and calls on us to yield.  after a time the
bee flew away.  he saw it creeping into the stained trumpet of a tyrian
convolvulus.  the flower seemed to quiver, and then swayed gently to
and fro.

suddenly the painter appeared at the door of the studio and made
staccato signs for them to come in.  they turned to each other and
smiled.

"i am waiting," he cried.  "do come in.  the light is quite perfect,
and you can bring your drinks."

they rose up and sauntered down the walk together.  two green-and-white
butterflies fluttered past them, and in the pear-tree at the corner of
the garden a thrush began to sing.

"you are glad you have met me, mr. gray," said lord henry, looking at
him.

"yes, i am glad now.  i wonder shall i always be glad?"

"always!  that is a dreadful word.  it makes me shudder when i hear it.
women are so fond of using it.  they spoil every romance by trying to
make it last for ever.  it is a meaningless word, too.  the only
difference between a caprice and a lifelong passion is that the caprice
lasts a little longer."

as they entered the studio, dorian gray put his hand upon lord henry's
arm.  "in that case, let our friendship be a caprice," he murmured,
flushing at his own boldness, then stepped up on the platform and
resumed his pose.

lord henry flung himself into a large wicker arm-chair and watched him.
the sweep and dash of the brush on the canvas made the only sound that
broke the stillness, except when, now and then, hallward stepped back
to look at his work from a distance.  in the slanting beams that
streamed through the open doorway the dust danced and was golden.  the
heavy scent of the roses seemed to brood over everything.

after about a quarter of an hour hallward stopped painting, looked for
a long time at dorian gray, and then for a long time at the picture,
biting the end of one of his huge brushes and frowning.  "it is quite
finished," he cried at last, and stooping down he wrote his name in
long vermilion letters on the left-hand corner of the canvas.

lord henry came over and examined the picture.  it was certainly a
wonderful work of art, and a wonderful likeness as well.

"my dear fellow, i congratulate you most warmly," he said.  "it is the
finest portrait of modern times.  mr. gray, come over and look at
yourself."

the lad started, as if awakened from some dream.

"is it really finished?" he murmured, stepping down from the platform.

"quite finished," said the painter.  "and you have sat splendidly
to-day. i am awfully obliged to you."

"that is entirely due to me," broke in lord henry.  "isn't it, mr.
gray?"

dorian made no answer, but passed listlessly in front of his picture
and turned towards it.  when he saw it he drew back, and his cheeks
flushed for a moment with pleasure.  a look of joy came into his eyes,
as if he had recognized himself for the first time.  he stood there
motionless and in wonder, dimly conscious that hallward was speaking to
him, but not catching the meaning of his words.  the sense of his own
beauty came on him like a revelation.  he had never felt it before.
basil hallward's compliments had seemed to him to be merely the
charming exaggeration of friendship.  he had listened to them, laughed
at them, forgotten them.  they had not influenced his nature.  then had
come lord henry wotton with his strange panegyric on youth, his
terrible warning of its brevity.  that had stirred him at the time, and
now, as he stood gazing at the shadow of his own loveliness, the full
reality of the description flashed across him.  yes, there would be a
day when his face would be wrinkled and wizen, his eyes dim and
colourless, the grace of his figure broken and deformed.  the scarlet
would pass away from his lips and the gold steal from his hair.  the
life that was to make his soul would mar his body.  he would become
dreadful, hideous, and uncouth.

as he thought of it, a sharp pang of pain struck through him like a
knife and made each delicate fibre of his nature quiver.  his eyes
deepened into amethyst, and across them came a mist of tears.  he felt
as if a hand of ice had been laid upon his heart.

"don't you like it?" cried hallward at last, stung a little by the
lad's silence, not understanding what it meant.

"of course he likes it," said lord henry.  "who wouldn't like it?  it
is one of the greatest things in modern art.  i will give you anything
you like to ask for it.  i must have it."

"it is not my property, harry."

"whose property is it?"

"dorian's, of course," answered the painter.

"he is a very lucky fellow."

"how sad it is!" murmured dorian gray with his eyes still fixed upon
his own portrait.  "how sad it is!  i shall grow old, and horrible, and
dreadful.  but this picture will remain always young.  it will never be
older than this particular day of june.... if it were only the other
way!  if it were i who was to be always young, and the picture that was
to grow old!  for that--for that--i would give everything!  yes, there
is nothing in the whole world i would not give!  i would give my soul
for that!"

"you would hardly care for such an arrangement, basil," cried lord
henry, laughing.  "it would be rather hard lines on your work."

"i should object very strongly, harry," said hallward.

dorian gray turned and looked at him.  "i believe you would, basil.
you like your art better than your friends.  i am no more to you than a
green bronze figure.  hardly as much, i dare say."

the painter stared in amazement.  it was so unlike dorian to speak like
that.  what had happened?  he seemed quite angry.  his face was flushed
and his cheeks burning.

"yes," he continued, "i am less to you than your ivory hermes or your
silver faun.  you will like them always.  how long will you like me?
till i have my first wrinkle, i suppose.  i know, now, that when one
loses one's good looks, whatever they may be, one loses everything.
your picture has taught me that.  lord henry wotton is perfectly right.
youth is the only thing worth having.  when i find that i am growing
old, i shall kill myself."

hallward turned pale and caught his hand.  "dorian!  dorian!" he cried,
"don't talk like that.  i have never had such a friend as you, and i
shall never have such another.  you are not jealous of material things,
are you?--you who are finer than any of them!"

"i am jealous of everything whose beauty does not die.  i am jealous of
the portrait you have painted of me.  why should it keep what i must
lose?  every moment that passes takes something from me and gives
something to it.  oh, if it were only the other way!  if the picture
could change, and i could be always what i am now!  why did you paint
it?  it will mock me some day--mock me horribly!"  the hot tears welled
into his eyes; he tore his hand away and, flinging himself on the
divan, he buried his face in the cushions, as though he was praying.

"this is your doing, harry," said the painter bitterly.

lord henry shrugged his shoulders.  "it is the real dorian gray--that
is all."

"it is not."

"if it is not, what have i to do with it?"

"you should have gone away when i asked you," he muttered.

"i stayed when you asked me," was lord henry's answer.

"harry, i can't quarrel with my two best friends at once, but between
you both you have made me hate the finest piece of work i have ever
done, and i will destroy it.  what is it but canvas and colour?  i will
not let it come across our three lives and mar them."

dorian gray lifted his golden head from the pillow, and with pallid
face and tear-stained eyes, looked at him as he walked over to the deal
painting-table that was set beneath the high curtained window.  what
was he doing there?  his fingers were straying about among the litter
of tin tubes and dry brushes, seeking for something.  yes, it was for
the long palette-knife, with its thin blade of lithe steel.  he had
found it at last.  he was going to rip up the canvas.

with a stifled sob the lad leaped from the couch, and, rushing over to
hallward, tore the knife out of his hand, and flung it to the end of
the studio.  "don't, basil, don't!" he cried.  "it would be murder!"

"i am glad you appreciate my work at last, dorian," said the painter
coldly when he had recovered from his surprise.  "i never thought you
would."

"appreciate it?  i am in love with it, basil.  it is part of myself.  i
feel that."

"well, as soon as you are dry, you shall be varnished, and framed, and
sent home.  then you can do what you like with yourself." and he walked
across the room and rang the bell for tea.  "you will have tea, of
course, dorian?  and so will you, harry?  or do you object to such
simple pleasures?"

"i adore simple pleasures," said lord henry.  "they are the last refuge
of the complex.  but i don't like scenes, except on the stage.  what
absurd fellows you are, both of you!  i wonder who it was defined man
as a rational animal.  it was the most premature definition ever given.
man is many things, but he is not rational.  i am glad he is not, after
all--though i wish you chaps would not squabble over the picture.  you
had much better let me have it, basil.  this silly boy doesn't really
want it, and i really do."

"if you let any one have it but me, basil, i shall never forgive you!"
cried dorian gray; "and i don't allow people to call me a silly boy."

"you know the picture is yours, dorian.  i gave it to you before it
existed."

"and you know you have been a little silly, mr. gray, and that you
don't really object to being reminded that you are extremely young."

"i should have objected very strongly this morning, lord henry."

"ah! this morning!  you have lived since then."

there came a knock at the door, and the butler entered with a laden
tea-tray and set it down upon a small japanese table.  there was a
rattle of cups and saucers and the hissing of a fluted georgian urn.
two globe-shaped china dishes were brought in by a page.  dorian gray
went over and poured out the tea.  the two men sauntered languidly to
the table and examined what was under the covers.

"let us go to the theatre to-night," said lord henry.  "there is sure
to be something on, somewhere.  i have promised to dine at white's, but
it is only with an old friend, so i can send him a wire to say that i
am ill, or that i am prevented from coming in consequence of a
subsequent engagement.  i think that would be a rather nice excuse:  it
would have all the surprise of candour."

"it is such a bore putting on one's dress-clothes," muttered hallward.
"and, when one has them on, they are so horrid."

"yes," answered lord henry dreamily, "the costume of the nineteenth
century is detestable.  it is so sombre, so depressing.  sin is the
only real colour-element left in modern life."

"you really must not say things like that before dorian, harry."

"before which dorian?  the one who is pouring out tea for us, or the
one in the picture?"

"before either."

"i should like to come to the theatre with you, lord henry," said the
lad.

"then you shall come; and you will come, too, basil, won't you?"

"i can't, really.  i would sooner not.  i have a lot of work to do."

"well, then, you and i will go alone, mr. gray."

"i should like that awfully."

the painter bit his lip and walked over, cup in hand, to the picture.
"i shall stay with the real dorian," he said, sadly.

"is it the real dorian?" cried the original of the portrait, strolling
across to him.  "am i really like that?"

"yes; you are just like that."

"how wonderful, basil!"

"at least you are like it in appearance.  but it will never alter,"
sighed hallward.  "that is something."

"what a fuss people make about fidelity!" exclaimed lord henry.  "why,
even in love it is purely a question for physiology.  it has nothing to
do with our own will.  young men want to be faithful, and are not; old
men want to be faithless, and cannot: that is all one can say."

"don't go to the theatre to-night, dorian," said hallward.  "stop and
dine with me."

"i can't, basil."

"why?"

"because i have promised lord henry wotton to go with him."

"he won't like you the better for keeping your promises.  he always
breaks his own.  i beg you not to go."

dorian gray laughed and shook his head.

"i entreat you."

the lad hesitated, and looked over at lord henry, who was watching them
from the tea-table with an amused smile.

"i must go, basil," he answered.

"very well," said hallward, and he went over and laid down his cup on
the tray.  "it is rather late, and, as you have to dress, you had
better lose no time.  good-bye, harry.  good-bye, dorian.  come and see
me soon.  come to-morrow."

"certainly."

"you won't forget?"

"no, of course not," cried dorian.

"and ... harry!"

"yes, basil?"

"remember what i asked you, when we were in the garden this morning."

"i have forgotten it."

"i trust you."

"i wish i could trust myself," said lord henry, laughing.  "come, mr.
gray, my hansom is outside, and i can drop you at your own place.
good-bye, basil.  it has been a most interesting afternoon."

as the door closed behind them, the painter flung himself down on a
sofa, and a look of pain came into his face.



chapter 3

at half-past twelve next day lord henry wotton strolled from curzon
street over to the albany to call on his uncle, lord fermor, a genial
if somewhat rough-mannered old bachelor, whom the outside world called
selfish because it derived no particular benefit from him, but who was
considered generous by society as he fed the people who amused him.
his father had been our ambassador at madrid when isabella was young
and prim unthought of, but had retired from the diplomatic service in a
capricious moment of annoyance on not being offered the embassy at
paris, a post to which he considered that he was fully entitled by
reason of his birth, his indolence, the good english of his dispatches,
and his inordinate passion for pleasure.  the son, who had been his
father's secretary, had resigned along with his chief, somewhat
foolishly as was thought at the time, and on succeeding some months
later to the title, had set himself to the serious study of the great
aristocratic art of doing absolutely nothing.  he had two large town
houses, but preferred to live in chambers as it was less trouble, and
took most of his meals at his club.  he paid some attention to the
management of his collieries in the midland counties, excusing himself
for this taint of industry on the ground that the one advantage of
having coal was that it enabled a gentleman to afford the decency of
burning wood on his own hearth.  in politics he was a tory, except when
the tories were in office, during which period he roundly abused them
for being a pack of radicals.  he was a hero to his valet, who bullied
him, and a terror to most of his relations, whom he bullied in turn.
only england could have produced him, and he always said that the
country was going to the dogs.  his principles were out of date, but
there was a good deal to be said for his prejudices.

when lord henry entered the room, he found his uncle sitting in a rough
shooting-coat, smoking a cheroot and grumbling over _the times_.  "well,
harry," said the old gentleman, "what brings you out so early?  i
thought you dandies never got up till two, and were not visible till
five."

"pure family affection, i assure you, uncle george.  i want to get
something out of you."

"money, i suppose," said lord fermor, making a wry face.  "well, sit
down and tell me all about it.  young people, nowadays, imagine that
money is everything."

"yes," murmured lord henry, settling his button-hole in his coat; "and
when they grow older they know it.  but i don't want money.  it is only
people who pay their bills who want that, uncle george, and i never pay
mine.  credit is the capital of a younger son, and one lives charmingly
upon it.  besides, i always deal with dartmoor's tradesmen, and
consequently they never bother me.  what i want is information:  not
useful information, of course; useless information."

"well, i can tell you anything that is in an english blue book, harry,
although those fellows nowadays write a lot of nonsense.  when i was in
the diplomatic, things were much better.  but i hear they let them in
now by examination.  what can you expect?  examinations, sir, are pure
humbug from beginning to end.  if a man is a gentleman, he knows quite
enough, and if he is not a gentleman, whatever he knows is bad for him."

"mr. dorian gray does not belong to blue books, uncle george," said
lord henry languidly.

"mr. dorian gray?  who is he?" asked lord fermor, knitting his bushy
white eyebrows.

"that is what i have come to learn, uncle george.  or rather, i know
who he is.  he is the last lord kelso's grandson.  his mother was a
devereux, lady margaret devereux.  i want you to tell me about his
mother.  what was she like?  whom did she marry?  you have known nearly
everybody in your time, so you might have known her.  i am very much
interested in mr. gray at present.  i have only just met him."

"kelso's grandson!" echoed the old gentleman.  "kelso's grandson! ...
of course.... i knew his mother intimately.  i believe i was at her
christening.  she was an extraordinarily beautiful girl, margaret
devereux, and made all the men frantic by running away with a penniless
young fellow--a mere nobody, sir, a subaltern in a foot regiment, or
something of that kind.  certainly.  i remember the whole thing as if
it happened yesterday.  the poor chap was killed in a duel at spa a few
months after the marriage.  there was an ugly story about it.  they
said kelso got some rascally adventurer, some belgian brute, to insult
his son-in-law in public--paid him, sir, to do it, paid him--and that
the fellow spitted his man as if he had been a pigeon.  the thing was
hushed up, but, egad, kelso ate his chop alone at the club for some
time afterwards.  he brought his daughter back with him, i was told,
and she never spoke to him again.  oh, yes; it was a bad business.  the
girl died, too, died within a year.  so she left a son, did she?  i had
forgotten that.  what sort of boy is he?  if he is like his mother, he
must be a good-looking chap."

"he is very good-looking," assented lord henry.

"i hope he will fall into proper hands," continued the old man.  "he
should have a pot of money waiting for him if kelso did the right thing
by him.  his mother had money, too.  all the selby property came to
her, through her grandfather.  her grandfather hated kelso, thought him
a mean dog.  he was, too.  came to madrid once when i was there.  egad,
i was ashamed of him.  the queen used to ask me about the english noble
who was always quarrelling with the cabmen about their fares.  they
made quite a story of it.  i didn't dare show my face at court for a
month.  i hope he treated his grandson better than he did the jarvies."

"i don't know," answered lord henry.  "i fancy that the boy will be
well off.  he is not of age yet.  he has selby, i know.  he told me so.
and ... his mother was very beautiful?"

"margaret devereux was one of the loveliest creatures i ever saw,
harry.  what on earth induced her to behave as she did, i never could
understand.  she could have married anybody she chose.  carlington was
mad after her.  she was romantic, though.  all the women of that family
were.  the men were a poor lot, but, egad! the women were wonderful.
carlington went on his knees to her.  told me so himself.  she laughed
at him, and there wasn't a girl in london at the time who wasn't after
him.  and by the way, harry, talking about silly marriages, what is
this humbug your father tells me about dartmoor wanting to marry an
american?  ain't english girls good enough for him?"

"it is rather fashionable to marry americans just now, uncle george."

"i'll back english women against the world, harry," said lord fermor,
striking the table with his fist.

"the betting is on the americans."

"they don't last, i am told," muttered his uncle.

"a long engagement exhausts them, but they are capital at a
steeplechase.  they take things flying.  i don't think dartmoor has a
chance."

"who are her people?" grumbled the old gentleman.  "has she got any?"

lord henry shook his head.  "american girls are as clever at concealing
their parents, as english women are at concealing their past," he said,
rising to go.

"they are pork-packers, i suppose?"

"i hope so, uncle george, for dartmoor's sake.  i am told that
pork-packing is the most lucrative profession in america, after
politics."

"is she pretty?"

"she behaves as if she was beautiful.  most american women do.  it is
the secret of their charm."

"why can't these american women stay in their own country?  they are
always telling us that it is the paradise for women."

"it is.  that is the reason why, like eve, they are so excessively
anxious to get out of it," said lord henry.  "good-bye, uncle george.
i shall be late for lunch, if i stop any longer.  thanks for giving me
the information i wanted.  i always like to know everything about my
new friends, and nothing about my old ones."

"where are you lunching, harry?"

"at aunt agatha's. i have asked myself and mr. gray.  he is her latest
_protege_."

"humph! tell your aunt agatha, harry, not to bother me any more with
her charity appeals.  i am sick of them.  why, the good woman thinks
that i have nothing to do but to write cheques for her silly fads."

"all right, uncle george, i'll tell her, but it won't have any effect.
philanthropic people lose all sense of humanity.  it is their
distinguishing characteristic."

the old gentleman growled approvingly and rang the bell for his
servant.  lord henry passed up the low arcade into burlington street
and turned his steps in the direction of berkeley square.

so that was the story of dorian gray's parentage.  crudely as it had
been told to him, it had yet stirred him by its suggestion of a
strange, almost modern romance.  a beautiful woman risking everything
for a mad passion.  a few wild weeks of happiness cut short by a
hideous, treacherous crime.  months of voiceless agony, and then a
child born in pain.  the mother snatched away by death, the boy left to
solitude and the tyranny of an old and loveless man.  yes; it was an
interesting background.  it posed the lad, made him more perfect, as it
were.  behind every exquisite thing that existed, there was something
tragic.  worlds had to be in travail, that the meanest flower might
blow.... and how charming he had been at dinner the night before, as
with startled eyes and lips parted in frightened pleasure he had sat
opposite to him at the club, the red candleshades staining to a richer
rose the wakening wonder of his face.  talking to him was like playing
upon an exquisite violin.  he answered to every touch and thrill of the
bow.... there was something terribly enthralling in the exercise of
influence.  no other activity was like it.  to project one's soul into
some gracious form, and let it tarry there for a moment; to hear one's
own intellectual views echoed back to one with all the added music of
passion and youth; to convey one's temperament into another as though
it were a subtle fluid or a strange perfume: there was a real joy in
that--perhaps the most satisfying joy left to us in an age so limited
and vulgar as our own, an age grossly carnal in its pleasures, and
grossly common in its aims.... he was a marvellous type, too, this lad,
whom by so curious a chance he had met in basil's studio, or could be
fashioned into a marvellous type, at any rate.  grace was his, and the
white purity of boyhood, and beauty such as old greek marbles kept for
us.  there was nothing that one could not do with him.  he could be
made a titan or a toy.  what a pity it was that such beauty was
destined to fade! ...  and basil?  from a psychological point of view,
how interesting he was!  the new manner in art, the fresh mode of
looking at life, suggested so strangely by the merely visible presence
of one who was unconscious of it all; the silent spirit that dwelt in
dim woodland, and walked unseen in open field, suddenly showing
herself, dryadlike and not afraid, because in his soul who sought for
her there had been wakened that wonderful vision to which alone are
wonderful things revealed; the mere shapes and patterns of things
becoming, as it were, refined, and gaining a kind of symbolical value,
as though they were themselves patterns of some other and more perfect
form whose shadow they made real:  how strange it all was!  he
remembered something like it in history.  was it not plato, that artist
in thought, who had first analyzed it?  was it not buonarotti who had
carved it in the coloured marbles of a sonnet-sequence? but in our own
century it was strange.... yes; he would try to be to dorian gray
what, without knowing it, the lad was to the painter who had fashioned
the wonderful portrait.  he would seek to dominate him--had already,
indeed, half done so.  he would make that wonderful spirit his own.
there was something fascinating in this son of love and death.

suddenly he stopped and glanced up at the houses.  he found that he had
passed his aunt's some distance, and, smiling to himself, turned back.
when he entered the somewhat sombre hall, the butler told him that they
had gone in to lunch.  he gave one of the footmen his hat and stick and
passed into the dining-room.

"late as usual, harry," cried his aunt, shaking her head at him.

he invented a facile excuse, and having taken the vacant seat next to
her, looked round to see who was there.  dorian bowed to him shyly from
the end of the table, a flush of pleasure stealing into his cheek.
opposite was the duchess of harley, a lady of admirable good-nature and
good temper, much liked by every one who knew her, and of those ample
architectural proportions that in women who are not duchesses are
described by contemporary historians as stoutness.  next to her sat, on
her right, sir thomas burdon, a radical member of parliament, who
followed his leader in public life and in private life followed the
best cooks, dining with the tories and thinking with the liberals, in
accordance with a wise and well-known rule.  the post on her left was
occupied by mr. erskine of treadley, an old gentleman of considerable
charm and culture, who had fallen, however, into bad habits of silence,
having, as he explained once to lady agatha, said everything that he
had to say before he was thirty.  his own neighbour was mrs. vandeleur,
one of his aunt's oldest friends, a perfect saint amongst women, but so
dreadfully dowdy that she reminded one of a badly bound hymn-book.
fortunately for him she had on the other side lord faudel, a most
intelligent middle-aged mediocrity, as bald as a ministerial statement
in the house of commons, with whom she was conversing in that intensely
earnest manner which is the one unpardonable error, as he remarked once
himself, that all really good people fall into, and from which none of
them ever quite escape.

"we are talking about poor dartmoor, lord henry," cried the duchess,
nodding pleasantly to him across the table.  "do you think he will
really marry this fascinating young person?"

"i believe she has made up her mind to propose to him, duchess."

"how dreadful!" exclaimed lady agatha.  "really, some one should
interfere."

"i am told, on excellent authority, that her father keeps an american
dry-goods store," said sir thomas burdon, looking supercilious.

"my uncle has already suggested pork-packing, sir thomas."

"dry-goods! what are american dry-goods?" asked the duchess, raising
her large hands in wonder and accentuating the verb.

"american novels," answered lord henry, helping himself to some quail.

the duchess looked puzzled.

"don't mind him, my dear," whispered lady agatha.  "he never means
anything that he says."

"when america was discovered," said the radical member--and he began to
give some wearisome facts.  like all people who try to exhaust a
subject, he exhausted his listeners.  the duchess sighed and exercised
her privilege of interruption.  "i wish to goodness it never had been
discovered at all!" she exclaimed.  "really, our girls have no chance
nowadays.  it is most unfair."

"perhaps, after all, america never has been discovered," said mr.
erskine; "i myself would say that it had merely been detected."

"oh! but i have seen specimens of the inhabitants," answered the
duchess vaguely.  "i must confess that most of them are extremely
pretty.  and they dress well, too.  they get all their dresses in
paris.  i wish i could afford to do the same."

"they say that when good americans die they go to paris," chuckled sir
thomas, who had a large wardrobe of humour's cast-off clothes.

"really!  and where do bad americans go to when they die?" inquired the
duchess.

"they go to america," murmured lord henry.

sir thomas frowned.  "i am afraid that your nephew is prejudiced
against that great country," he said to lady agatha.  "i have travelled
all over it in cars provided by the directors, who, in such matters,
are extremely civil.  i assure you that it is an education to visit it."

"but must we really see chicago in order to be educated?" asked mr.
erskine plaintively.  "i don't feel up to the journey."

sir thomas waved his hand.  "mr. erskine of treadley has the world on
his shelves. we practical men like to see things, not to read about
them. the americans are an extremely interesting people. they are
absolutely reasonable. i think that is their distinguishing
characteristic. yes, mr. erskine, an absolutely reasonable people. i
assure you there is no nonsense about the americans."

"how dreadful!" cried lord henry.  "i can stand brute force, but brute
reason is quite unbearable.  there is something unfair about its use.
it is hitting below the intellect."

"i do not understand you," said sir thomas, growing rather red.

"i do, lord henry," murmured mr. erskine, with a smile.

"paradoxes are all very well in their way...." rejoined the baronet.

"was that a paradox?" asked mr. erskine.  "i did not think so.  perhaps
it was.  well, the way of paradoxes is the way of truth.  to test
reality we must see it on the tight rope.  when the verities become
acrobats, we can judge them."

"dear me!" said lady agatha, "how you men argue!  i am sure i never can
make out what you are talking about.  oh!  harry, i am quite vexed with
you.  why do you try to persuade our nice mr. dorian gray to give up
the east end?  i assure you he would be quite invaluable.  they would
love his playing."

"i want him to play to me," cried lord henry, smiling, and he looked
down the table and caught a bright answering glance.

"but they are so unhappy in whitechapel," continued lady agatha.

"i can sympathize with everything except suffering," said lord henry,
shrugging his shoulders.  "i cannot sympathize with that.  it is too
ugly, too horrible, too distressing.  there is something terribly
morbid in the modern sympathy with pain.  one should sympathize with
the colour, the beauty, the joy of life.  the less said about life's
sores, the better."

"still, the east end is a very important problem," remarked sir thomas
with a grave shake of the head.

"quite so," answered the young lord.  "it is the problem of slavery,
and we try to solve it by amusing the slaves."

the politician looked at him keenly.  "what change do you propose,
then?" he asked.

lord henry laughed.  "i don't desire to change anything in england
except the weather," he answered.  "i am quite content with philosophic
contemplation.  but, as the nineteenth century has gone bankrupt
through an over-expenditure of sympathy, i would suggest that we should
appeal to science to put us straight.  the advantage of the emotions is
that they lead us astray, and the advantage of science is that it is
not emotional."

"but we have such grave responsibilities," ventured mrs. vandeleur
timidly.

"terribly grave," echoed lady agatha.

lord henry looked over at mr. erskine.  "humanity takes itself too
seriously.  it is the world's original sin.  if the caveman had known
how to laugh, history would have been different."

"you are really very comforting," warbled the duchess.  "i have always
felt rather guilty when i came to see your dear aunt, for i take no
interest at all in the east end.  for the future i shall be able to
look her in the face without a blush."

"a blush is very becoming, duchess," remarked lord henry.

"only when one is young," she answered.  "when an old woman like myself
blushes, it is a very bad sign.  ah!  lord henry, i wish you would tell
me how to become young again."

he thought for a moment.  "can you remember any great error that you
committed in your early days, duchess?" he asked, looking at her across
the table.

"a great many, i fear," she cried.

"then commit them over again," he said gravely.  "to get back one's
youth, one has merely to repeat one's follies."

"a delightful theory!" she exclaimed.  "i must put it into practice."

"a dangerous theory!" came from sir thomas's tight lips.  lady agatha
shook her head, but could not help being amused.  mr. erskine listened.

"yes," he continued, "that is one of the great secrets of life.
nowadays most people die of a sort of creeping common sense, and
discover when it is too late that the only things one never regrets are
one's mistakes."

a laugh ran round the table.

he played with the idea and grew wilful; tossed it into the air and
transformed it; let it escape and recaptured it; made it iridescent
with fancy and winged it with paradox.  the praise of folly, as he went
on, soared into a philosophy, and philosophy herself became young, and
catching the mad music of pleasure, wearing, one might fancy, her
wine-stained robe and wreath of ivy, danced like a bacchante over the
hills of life, and mocked the slow silenus for being sober.  facts fled
before her like frightened forest things.  her white feet trod the huge
press at which wise omar sits, till the seething grape-juice rose round
her bare limbs in waves of purple bubbles, or crawled in red foam over
the vat's black, dripping, sloping sides.  it was an extraordinary
improvisation.  he felt that the eyes of dorian gray were fixed on him,
and the consciousness that amongst his audience there was one whose
temperament he wished to fascinate seemed to give his wit keenness and
to lend colour to his imagination.  he was brilliant, fantastic,
irresponsible.  he charmed his listeners out of themselves, and they
followed his pipe, laughing.  dorian gray never took his gaze off him,
but sat like one under a spell, smiles chasing each other over his lips
and wonder growing grave in his darkening eyes.

at last, liveried in the costume of the age, reality entered the room
in the shape of a servant to tell the duchess that her carriage was
waiting.  she wrung her hands in mock despair.  "how annoying!" she
cried.  "i must go.  i have to call for my husband at the club, to take
him to some absurd meeting at willis's rooms, where he is going to be
in the chair.  if i am late he is sure to be furious, and i couldn't
have a scene in this bonnet.  it is far too fragile.  a harsh word
would ruin it.  no, i must go, dear agatha.  good-bye, lord henry, you
are quite delightful and dreadfully demoralizing.  i am sure i don't
know what to say about your views.  you must come and dine with us some
night.  tuesday?  are you disengaged tuesday?"

"for you i would throw over anybody, duchess," said lord henry with a
bow.

"ah! that is very nice, and very wrong of you," she cried; "so mind you
come"; and she swept out of the room, followed by lady agatha and the
other ladies.

when lord henry had sat down again, mr. erskine moved round, and taking
a chair close to him, placed his hand upon his arm.

"you talk books away," he said; "why don't you write one?"

"i am too fond of reading books to care to write them, mr. erskine.  i
should like to write a novel certainly, a novel that would be as lovely
as a persian carpet and as unreal.  but there is no literary public in
england for anything except newspapers, primers, and encyclopaedias.
of all people in the world the english have the least sense of the
beauty of literature."

"i fear you are right," answered mr. erskine.  "i myself used to have
literary ambitions, but i gave them up long ago.  and now, my dear
young friend, if you will allow me to call you so, may i ask if you
really meant all that you said to us at lunch?"

"i quite forget what i said," smiled lord henry.  "was it all very bad?"

"very bad indeed.  in fact i consider you extremely dangerous, and if
anything happens to our good duchess, we shall all look on you as being
primarily responsible.  but i should like to talk to you about life.
the generation into which i was born was tedious.  some day, when you
are tired of london, come down to treadley and expound to me your
philosophy of pleasure over some admirable burgundy i am fortunate
enough to possess."

"i shall be charmed.  a visit to treadley would be a great privilege.
it has a perfect host, and a perfect library."

"you will complete it," answered the old gentleman with a courteous
bow.  "and now i must bid good-bye to your excellent aunt.  i am due at
the athenaeum.  it is the hour when we sleep there."

"all of you, mr. erskine?"

"forty of us, in forty arm-chairs. we are practising for an english
academy of letters."

lord henry laughed and rose.  "i am going to the park," he cried.

as he was passing out of the door, dorian gray touched him on the arm.
"let me come with you," he murmured.

"but i thought you had promised basil hallward to go and see him,"
answered lord henry.

"i would sooner come with you; yes, i feel i must come with you.  do
let me.  and you will promise to talk to me all the time?  no one talks
so wonderfully as you do."

"ah!  i have talked quite enough for to-day," said lord henry, smiling.
"all i want now is to look at life.  you may come and look at it with
me, if you care to."



chapter 4

one afternoon, a month later, dorian gray was reclining in a luxurious
arm-chair, in the little library of lord henry's house in mayfair.  it
was, in its way, a very charming room, with its high panelled
wainscoting of olive-stained oak, its cream-coloured frieze and ceiling
of raised plasterwork, and its brickdust felt carpet strewn with silk,
long-fringed persian rugs.  on a tiny satinwood table stood a statuette
by clodion, and beside it lay a copy of les cent nouvelles, bound for
margaret of valois by clovis eve and powdered with the gilt daisies
that queen had selected for her device.  some large blue china jars and
parrot-tulips were ranged on the mantelshelf, and through the small
leaded panes of the window streamed the apricot-coloured light of a
summer day in london.

lord henry had not yet come in.  he was always late on principle, his
principle being that punctuality is the thief of time.  so the lad was
looking rather sulky, as with listless fingers he turned over the pages
of an elaborately illustrated edition of manon lescaut that he had
found in one of the book-cases. the formal monotonous ticking of the
louis quatorze clock annoyed him.  once or twice he thought of going
away.

at last he heard a step outside, and the door opened.  "how late you
are, harry!" he murmured.

"i am afraid it is not harry, mr. gray," answered a shrill voice.

he glanced quickly round and rose to his feet.  "i beg your pardon.  i
thought--"

"you thought it was my husband.  it is only his wife.  you must let me
introduce myself.  i know you quite well by your photographs.  i think
my husband has got seventeen of them."

"not seventeen, lady henry?"

"well, eighteen, then.  and i saw you with him the other night at the
opera."  she laughed nervously as she spoke, and watched him with her
vague forget-me-not eyes.  she was a curious woman, whose dresses
always looked as if they had been designed in a rage and put on in a
tempest.  she was usually in love with somebody, and, as her passion
was never returned, she had kept all her illusions.  she tried to look
picturesque, but only succeeded in being untidy.  her name was
victoria, and she had a perfect mania for going to church.

"that was at lohengrin, lady henry, i think?"

"yes; it was at dear lohengrin.  i like wagner's music better than
anybody's. it is so loud that one can talk the whole time without other
people hearing what one says.  that is a great advantage, don't you
think so, mr. gray?"

the same nervous staccato laugh broke from her thin lips, and her
fingers began to play with a long tortoise-shell paper-knife.

dorian smiled and shook his head:  "i am afraid i don't think so, lady
henry.  i never talk during music--at least, during good music.  if one
hears bad music, it is one's duty to drown it in conversation."

"ah! that is one of harry's views, isn't it, mr. gray?  i always hear
harry's views from his friends.  it is the only way i get to know of
them.  but you must not think i don't like good music.  i adore it, but
i am afraid of it.  it makes me too romantic.  i have simply worshipped
pianists--two at a time, sometimes, harry tells me.  i don't know what
it is about them.  perhaps it is that they are foreigners.  they all
are, ain't they?  even those that are born in england become foreigners
after a time, don't they?  it is so clever of them, and such a
compliment to art.  makes it quite cosmopolitan, doesn't it?  you have
never been to any of my parties, have you, mr. gray?  you must come.  i
can't afford orchids, but i spare no expense in foreigners.  they make
one's rooms look so picturesque.  but here is harry!  harry, i came in
to look for you, to ask you something--i forget what it was--and i
found mr. gray here.  we have had such a pleasant chat about music.  we
have quite the same ideas.  no; i think our ideas are quite different.
but he has been most pleasant.  i am so glad i've seen him."

"i am charmed, my love, quite charmed," said lord henry, elevating his
dark, crescent-shaped eyebrows and looking at them both with an amused
smile.  "so sorry i am late, dorian.  i went to look after a piece of
old brocade in wardour street and had to bargain for hours for it.
nowadays people know the price of everything and the value of nothing."

"i am afraid i must be going," exclaimed lady henry, breaking an
awkward silence with her silly sudden laugh.  "i have promised to drive
with the duchess.  good-bye, mr. gray.  good-bye, harry.  you are
dining out, i suppose?  so am i. perhaps i shall see you at lady
thornbury's."

"i dare say, my dear," said lord henry, shutting the door behind her
as, looking like a bird of paradise that had been out all night in the
rain, she flitted out of the room, leaving a faint odour of
frangipanni.  then he lit a cigarette and flung himself down on the
sofa.

"never marry a woman with straw-coloured hair, dorian," he said after a
few puffs.

"why, harry?"

"because they are so sentimental."

"but i like sentimental people."

"never marry at all, dorian.  men marry because they are tired; women,
because they are curious:  both are disappointed."

"i don't think i am likely to marry, harry.  i am too much in love.
that is one of your aphorisms.  i am putting it into practice, as i do
everything that you say."

"who are you in love with?" asked lord henry after a pause.

"with an actress," said dorian gray, blushing.

lord henry shrugged his shoulders.  "that is a rather commonplace
_debut_."

"you would not say so if you saw her, harry."

"who is she?"

"her name is sibyl vane."

"never heard of her."

"no one has.  people will some day, however.  she is a genius."

"my dear boy, no woman is a genius.  women are a decorative sex.  they
never have anything to say, but they say it charmingly.  women
represent the triumph of matter over mind, just as men represent the
triumph of mind over morals."

"harry, how can you?"

"my dear dorian, it is quite true.  i am analysing women at present, so
i ought to know.  the subject is not so abstruse as i thought it was.
i find that, ultimately, there are only two kinds of women, the plain
and the coloured.  the plain women are very useful.  if you want to
gain a reputation for respectability, you have merely to take them down
to supper.  the other women are very charming.  they commit one
mistake, however.  they paint in order to try and look young.  our
grandmothers painted in order to try and talk brilliantly.  _rouge_ and
_esprit_ used to go together.  that is all over now.  as long as a woman
can look ten years younger than her own daughter, she is perfectly
satisfied.  as for conversation, there are only five women in london
worth talking to, and two of these can't be admitted into decent
society.  however, tell me about your genius.  how long have you known
her?"

"ah!  harry, your views terrify me."

"never mind that.  how long have you known her?"

"about three weeks."

"and where did you come across her?"

"i will tell you, harry, but you mustn't be unsympathetic about it.
after all, it never would have happened if i had not met you.  you
filled me with a wild desire to know everything about life.  for days
after i met you, something seemed to throb in my veins.  as i lounged
in the park, or strolled down piccadilly, i used to look at every one
who passed me and wonder, with a mad curiosity, what sort of lives they
led.  some of them fascinated me.  others filled me with terror.  there
was an exquisite poison in the air.  i had a passion for sensations....
well, one evening about seven o'clock, i determined to go out in search
of some adventure.  i felt that this grey monstrous london of ours,
with its myriads of people, its sordid sinners, and its splendid sins,
as you once phrased it, must have something in store for me.  i fancied
a thousand things.  the mere danger gave me a sense of delight.  i
remembered what you had said to me on that wonderful evening when we
first dined together, about the search for beauty being the real secret
of life.  i don't know what i expected, but i went out and wandered
eastward, soon losing my way in a labyrinth of grimy streets and black
grassless squares.  about half-past eight i passed by an absurd little
theatre, with great flaring gas-jets and gaudy play-bills.  a hideous
jew, in the most amazing waistcoat i ever beheld in my life, was
standing at the entrance, smoking a vile cigar.  he had greasy
ringlets, and an enormous diamond blazed in the centre of a soiled
shirt. 'have a box, my lord?' he said, when he saw me, and he took off
his hat with an air of gorgeous servility.  there was something about
him, harry, that amused me.  he was such a monster.  you will laugh at
me, i know, but i really went in and paid a whole guinea for the
stage-box. to the present day i can't make out why i did so; and yet if
i hadn't--my dear harry, if i hadn't--i should have missed the greatest
romance of my life.  i see you are laughing.  it is horrid of you!"

"i am not laughing, dorian; at least i am not laughing at you.  but you
should not say the greatest romance of your life.  you should say the
first romance of your life.  you will always be loved, and you will
always be in love with love.  a _grande passion_ is the privilege of
people who have nothing to do.  that is the one use of the idle classes
of a country.  don't be afraid.  there are exquisite things in store
for you.  this is merely the beginning."

"do you think my nature so shallow?" cried dorian gray angrily.

"no; i think your nature so deep."

"how do you mean?"

"my dear boy, the people who love only once in their lives are really
the shallow people.  what they call their loyalty, and their fidelity,
i call either the lethargy of custom or their lack of imagination.
faithfulness is to the emotional life what consistency is to the life
of the intellect--simply a confession of failure.  faithfulness!  i
must analyse it some day.  the passion for property is in it.  there
are many things that we would throw away if we were not afraid that
others might pick them up.  but i don't want to interrupt you.  go on
with your story."

"well, i found myself seated in a horrid little private box, with a
vulgar drop-scene staring me in the face.  i looked out from behind the
curtain and surveyed the house.  it was a tawdry affair, all cupids and
cornucopias, like a third-rate wedding-cake. the gallery and pit were
fairly full, but the two rows of dingy stalls were quite empty, and
there was hardly a person in what i suppose they called the
dress-circle.  women went about with oranges and ginger-beer, and there
was a terrible consumption of nuts going on."

"it must have been just like the palmy days of the british drama."

"just like, i should fancy, and very depressing.  i began to wonder
what on earth i should do when i caught sight of the play-bill.  what
do you think the play was, harry?"

"i should think 'the idiot boy', or 'dumb but innocent'.  our fathers
used to like that sort of piece, i believe.  the longer i live, dorian,
the more keenly i feel that whatever was good enough for our fathers is
not good enough for us.  in art, as in politics, _les grandperes ont
toujours tort_."

"this play was good enough for us, harry.  it was romeo and juliet.  i
must admit that i was rather annoyed at the idea of seeing shakespeare
done in such a wretched hole of a place.  still, i felt interested, in
a sort of way.  at any rate, i determined to wait for the first act.
there was a dreadful orchestra, presided over by a young hebrew who sat
at a cracked piano, that nearly drove me away, but at last the
drop-scene was drawn up and the play began.  romeo was a stout elderly
gentleman, with corked eyebrows, a husky tragedy voice, and a figure
like a beer-barrel. mercutio was almost as bad.  he was played by the
low-comedian, who had introduced gags of his own and was on most
friendly terms with the pit.  they were both as grotesque as the
scenery, and that looked as if it had come out of a country-booth. but
juliet!  harry, imagine a girl, hardly seventeen years of age, with a
little, flowerlike face, a small greek head with plaited coils of
dark-brown hair, eyes that were violet wells of passion, lips that were
like the petals of a rose.  she was the loveliest thing i had ever seen
in my life.  you said to me once that pathos left you unmoved, but that
beauty, mere beauty, could fill your eyes with tears.  i tell you,
harry, i could hardly see this girl for the mist of tears that came
across me.  and her voice--i never heard such a voice.  it was very low
at first, with deep mellow notes that seemed to fall singly upon one's
ear.  then it became a little louder, and sounded like a flute or a
distant hautboy.  in the garden-scene it had all the tremulous ecstasy
that one hears just before dawn when nightingales are singing.  there
were moments, later on, when it had the wild passion of violins.  you
know how a voice can stir one.  your voice and the voice of sibyl vane
are two things that i shall never forget.  when i close my eyes, i hear
them, and each of them says something different.  i don't know which to
follow.  why should i not love her?  harry, i do love her.  she is
everything to me in life.  night after night i go to see her play.  one
evening she is rosalind, and the next evening she is imogen.  i have
seen her die in the gloom of an italian tomb, sucking the poison from
her lover's lips.  i have watched her wandering through the forest of
arden, disguised as a pretty boy in hose and doublet and dainty cap.
she has been mad, and has come into the presence of a guilty king, and
given him rue to wear and bitter herbs to taste of.  she has been
innocent, and the black hands of jealousy have crushed her reedlike
throat.  i have seen her in every age and in every costume.  ordinary
women never appeal to one's imagination.  they are limited to their
century.  no glamour ever transfigures them.  one knows their minds as
easily as one knows their bonnets.  one can always find them.  there is
no mystery in any of them.  they ride in the park in the morning and
chatter at tea-parties in the afternoon.  they have their stereotyped
smile and their fashionable manner.  they are quite obvious.  but an
actress!  how different an actress is!  harry! why didn't you tell me
that the only thing worth loving is an actress?"

"because i have loved so many of them, dorian."

"oh, yes, horrid people with dyed hair and painted faces."

"don't run down dyed hair and painted faces.  there is an extraordinary
charm in them, sometimes," said lord henry.

"i wish now i had not told you about sibyl vane."

"you could not have helped telling me, dorian.  all through your life
you will tell me everything you do."

"yes, harry, i believe that is true.  i cannot help telling you things.
you have a curious influence over me.  if i ever did a crime, i would
come and confess it to you.  you would understand me."

"people like you--the wilful sunbeams of life--don't commit crimes,
dorian.  but i am much obliged for the compliment, all the same.  and
now tell me--reach me the matches, like a good boy--thanks--what are
your actual relations with sibyl vane?"

dorian gray leaped to his feet, with flushed cheeks and burning eyes.
"harry!  sibyl vane is sacred!"

"it is only the sacred things that are worth touching, dorian," said
lord henry, with a strange touch of pathos in his voice.  "but why
should you be annoyed?  i suppose she will belong to you some day.
when one is in love, one always begins by deceiving one's self, and one
always ends by deceiving others.  that is what the world calls a
romance.  you know her, at any rate, i suppose?"

"of course i know her.  on the first night i was at the theatre, the
horrid old jew came round to the box after the performance was over and
offered to take me behind the scenes and introduce me to her.  i was
furious with him, and told him that juliet had been dead for hundreds
of years and that her body was lying in a marble tomb in verona.  i
think, from his blank look of amazement, that he was under the
impression that i had taken too much champagne, or something."

"i am not surprised."

"then he asked me if i wrote for any of the newspapers.  i told him i
never even read them.  he seemed terribly disappointed at that, and
confided to me that all the dramatic critics were in a conspiracy
against him, and that they were every one of them to be bought."

"i should not wonder if he was quite right there.  but, on the other
hand, judging from their appearance, most of them cannot be at all
expensive."

"well, he seemed to think they were beyond his means," laughed dorian.
"by this time, however, the lights were being put out in the theatre,
and i had to go.  he wanted me to try some cigars that he strongly
recommended.  i declined.  the next night, of course, i arrived at the
place again.  when he saw me, he made me a low bow and assured me that
i was a munificent patron of art.  he was a most offensive brute,
though he had an extraordinary passion for shakespeare.  he told me
once, with an air of pride, that his five bankruptcies were entirely
due to 'the bard,' as he insisted on calling him.  he seemed to think
it a distinction."

"it was a distinction, my dear dorian--a great distinction.  most
people become bankrupt through having invested too heavily in the prose
of life.  to have ruined one's self over poetry is an honour.  but when
did you first speak to miss sibyl vane?"

"the third night.  she had been playing rosalind.  i could not help
going round.  i had thrown her some flowers, and she had looked at
me--at least i fancied that she had.  the old jew was persistent.  he
seemed determined to take me behind, so i consented.  it was curious my
not wanting to know her, wasn't it?"

"no; i don't think so."

"my dear harry, why?"

"i will tell you some other time.  now i want to know about the girl."

"sibyl?  oh, she was so shy and so gentle.  there is something of a
child about her.  her eyes opened wide in exquisite wonder when i told
her what i thought of her performance, and she seemed quite unconscious
of her power.  i think we were both rather nervous.  the old jew stood
grinning at the doorway of the dusty greenroom, making elaborate
speeches about us both, while we stood looking at each other like
children.  he would insist on calling me 'my lord,' so i had to assure
sibyl that i was not anything of the kind.  she said quite simply to
me, 'you look more like a prince.  i must call you prince charming.'"

"upon my word, dorian, miss sibyl knows how to pay compliments."

"you don't understand her, harry.  she regarded me merely as a person
in a play.  she knows nothing of life.  she lives with her mother, a
faded tired woman who played lady capulet in a sort of magenta
dressing-wrapper on the first night, and looks as if she had seen
better days."

"i know that look.  it depresses me," murmured lord henry, examining
his rings.

"the jew wanted to tell me her history, but i said it did not interest
me."

"you were quite right.  there is always something infinitely mean about
other people's tragedies."

"sibyl is the only thing i care about.  what is it to me where she came
from?  from her little head to her little feet, she is absolutely and
entirely divine.  every night of my life i go to see her act, and every
night she is more marvellous."

"that is the reason, i suppose, that you never dine with me now.  i
thought you must have some curious romance on hand.  you have; but it
is not quite what i expected."

"my dear harry, we either lunch or sup together every day, and i have
been to the opera with you several times," said dorian, opening his
blue eyes in wonder.

"you always come dreadfully late."

"well, i can't help going to see sibyl play," he cried, "even if it is
only for a single act.  i get hungry for her presence; and when i think
of the wonderful soul that is hidden away in that little ivory body, i
am filled with awe."

"you can dine with me to-night, dorian, can't you?"

he shook his head.  "to-night she is imogen," he answered, "and
to-morrow night she will be juliet."

"when is she sibyl vane?"

"never."

"i congratulate you."

"how horrid you are!  she is all the great heroines of the world in
one.  she is more than an individual.  you laugh, but i tell you she
has genius.  i love her, and i must make her love me.  you, who know
all the secrets of life, tell me how to charm sibyl vane to love me!  i
want to make romeo jealous.  i want the dead lovers of the world to
hear our laughter and grow sad.  i want a breath of our passion to stir
their dust into consciousness, to wake their ashes into pain.  my god,
harry, how i worship her!"  he was walking up and down the room as he
spoke.  hectic spots of red burned on his cheeks.  he was terribly
excited.

lord henry watched him with a subtle sense of pleasure.  how different
he was now from the shy frightened boy he had met in basil hallward's
studio!  his nature had developed like a flower, had borne blossoms of
scarlet flame.  out of its secret hiding-place had crept his soul, and
desire had come to meet it on the way.

"and what do you propose to do?" said lord henry at last.

"i want you and basil to come with me some night and see her act.  i
have not the slightest fear of the result.  you are certain to
acknowledge her genius.  then we must get her out of the jew's hands.
she is bound to him for three years--at least for two years and eight
months--from the present time.  i shall have to pay him something, of
course.  when all that is settled, i shall take a west end theatre and
bring her out properly.  she will make the world as mad as she has made
me."

"that would be impossible, my dear boy."

"yes, she will.  she has not merely art, consummate art-instinct, in
her, but she has personality also; and you have often told me that it
is personalities, not principles, that move the age."

"well, what night shall we go?"

"let me see.  to-day is tuesday.  let us fix to-morrow. she plays
juliet to-morrow."

"all right.  the bristol at eight o'clock; and i will get basil."

"not eight, harry, please.  half-past six.  we must be there before the
curtain rises.  you must see her in the first act, where she meets
romeo."

"half-past six!  what an hour!  it will be like having a meat-tea, or
reading an english novel.  it must be seven.  no gentleman dines before
seven.  shall you see basil between this and then?  or shall i write to
him?"

"dear basil!  i have not laid eyes on him for a week.  it is rather
horrid of me, as he has sent me my portrait in the most wonderful
frame, specially designed by himself, and, though i am a little jealous
of the picture for being a whole month younger than i am, i must admit
that i delight in it.  perhaps you had better write to him.  i don't
want to see him alone.  he says things that annoy me.  he gives me good
advice."

lord henry smiled.  "people are very fond of giving away what they need
most themselves.  it is what i call the depth of generosity."

"oh, basil is the best of fellows, but he seems to me to be just a bit
of a philistine.  since i have known you, harry, i have discovered
that."

"basil, my dear boy, puts everything that is charming in him into his
work.  the consequence is that he has nothing left for life but his
prejudices, his principles, and his common sense.  the only artists i
have ever known who are personally delightful are bad artists.  good
artists exist simply in what they make, and consequently are perfectly
uninteresting in what they are.  a great poet, a really great poet, is
the most unpoetical of all creatures.  but inferior poets are
absolutely fascinating.  the worse their rhymes are, the more
picturesque they look.  the mere fact of having published a book of
second-rate sonnets makes a man quite irresistible.  he lives the
poetry that he cannot write.  the others write the poetry that they
dare not realize."

"i wonder is that really so, harry?" said dorian gray, putting some
perfume on his handkerchief out of a large, gold-topped bottle that
stood on the table.  "it must be, if you say it.  and now i am off.
imogen is waiting for me.  don't forget about to-morrow. good-bye."

as he left the room, lord henry's heavy eyelids drooped, and he began
to think.  certainly few people had ever interested him so much as
dorian gray, and yet the lad's mad adoration of some one else caused
him not the slightest pang of annoyance or jealousy.  he was pleased by
it.  it made him a more interesting study.  he had been always
enthralled by the methods of natural science, but the ordinary
subject-matter of that science had seemed to him trivial and of no
import.  and so he had begun by vivisecting himself, as he had ended by
vivisecting others.  human life--that appeared to him the one thing
worth investigating.  compared to it there was nothing else of any
value.  it was true that as one watched life in its curious crucible of
pain and pleasure, one could not wear over one's face a mask of glass,
nor keep the sulphurous fumes from troubling the brain and making the
imagination turbid with monstrous fancies and misshapen dreams.  there
were poisons so subtle that to know their properties one had to sicken
of them.  there were maladies so strange that one had to pass through
them if one sought to understand their nature.  and, yet, what a great
reward one received!  how wonderful the whole world became to one!  to
note the curious hard logic of passion, and the emotional coloured life
of the intellect--to observe where they met, and where they separated,
at what point they were in unison, and at what point they were at
discord--there was a delight in that!  what matter what the cost was?
one could never pay too high a price for any sensation.

he was conscious--and the thought brought a gleam of pleasure into his
brown agate eyes--that it was through certain words of his, musical
words said with musical utterance, that dorian gray's soul had turned
to this white girl and bowed in worship before her.  to a large extent
the lad was his own creation.  he had made him premature.  that was
something.  ordinary people waited till life disclosed to them its
secrets, but to the few, to the elect, the mysteries of life were
revealed before the veil was drawn away.  sometimes this was the effect
of art, and chiefly of the art of literature, which dealt immediately
with the passions and the intellect.  but now and then a complex
personality took the place and assumed the office of art, was indeed,
in its way, a real work of art, life having its elaborate masterpieces,
just as poetry has, or sculpture, or painting.

yes, the lad was premature.  he was gathering his harvest while it was
yet spring.  the pulse and passion of youth were in him, but he was
becoming self-conscious. it was delightful to watch him.  with his
beautiful face, and his beautiful soul, he was a thing to wonder at.
it was no matter how it all ended, or was destined to end.  he was like
one of those gracious figures in a pageant or a play, whose joys seem
to be remote from one, but whose sorrows stir one's sense of beauty,
and whose wounds are like red roses.

soul and body, body and soul--how mysterious they were!  there was
animalism in the soul, and the body had its moments of spirituality.
the senses could refine, and the intellect could degrade.  who could
say where the fleshly impulse ceased, or the psychical impulse began?
how shallow were the arbitrary definitions of ordinary psychologists!
and yet how difficult to decide between the claims of the various
schools!  was the soul a shadow seated in the house of sin?  or was the
body really in the soul, as giordano bruno thought?  the separation of
spirit from matter was a mystery, and the union of spirit with matter
was a mystery also.

he began to wonder whether we could ever make psychology so absolute a
science that each little spring of life would be revealed to us.  as it
was, we always misunderstood ourselves and rarely understood others.
experience was of no ethical value.  it was merely the name men gave to
their mistakes.  moralists had, as a rule, regarded it as a mode of
warning, had claimed for it a certain ethical efficacy in the formation
of character, had praised it as something that taught us what to follow
and showed us what to avoid.  but there was no motive power in
experience.  it was as little of an active cause as conscience itself.
all that it really demonstrated was that our future would be the same
as our past, and that the sin we had done once, and with loathing, we
would do many times, and with joy.

it was clear to him that the experimental method was the only method by
which one could arrive at any scientific analysis of the passions; and
certainly dorian gray was a subject made to his hand, and seemed to
promise rich and fruitful results.  his sudden mad love for sibyl vane
was a psychological phenomenon of no small interest.  there was no
doubt that curiosity had much to do with it, curiosity and the desire
for new experiences, yet it was not a simple, but rather a very complex
passion.  what there was in it of the purely sensuous instinct of
boyhood had been transformed by the workings of the imagination,
changed into something that seemed to the lad himself to be remote from
sense, and was for that very reason all the more dangerous.  it was the
passions about whose origin we deceived ourselves that tyrannized most
strongly over us.  our weakest motives were those of whose nature we
were conscious.  it often happened that when we thought we were
experimenting on others we were really experimenting on ourselves.

while lord henry sat dreaming on these things, a knock came to the
door, and his valet entered and reminded him it was time to dress for
dinner.  he got up and looked out into the street.  the sunset had
smitten into scarlet gold the upper windows of the houses opposite.
the panes glowed like plates of heated metal.  the sky above was like a
faded rose.  he thought of his friend's young fiery-coloured life and
wondered how it was all going to end.

when he arrived home, about half-past twelve o'clock, he saw a telegram
lying on the hall table.  he opened it and found it was from dorian
gray.  it was to tell him that he was engaged to be married to sibyl
vane.



chapter 5

"mother, mother, i am so happy!" whispered the girl, burying her face
in the lap of the faded, tired-looking woman who, with back turned to
the shrill intrusive light, was sitting in the one arm-chair that their
dingy sitting-room contained.  "i am so happy!" she repeated, "and you
must be happy, too!"

mrs. vane winced and put her thin, bismuth-whitened hands on her
daughter's head.  "happy!" she echoed, "i am only happy, sibyl, when i
see you act.  you must not think of anything but your acting.  mr.
isaacs has been very good to us, and we owe him money."

the girl looked up and pouted.  "money, mother?" she cried, "what does
money matter?  love is more than money."

"mr. isaacs has advanced us fifty pounds to pay off our debts and to
get a proper outfit for james.  you must not forget that, sibyl.  fifty
pounds is a very large sum.  mr. isaacs has been most considerate."

"he is not a gentleman, mother, and i hate the way he talks to me,"
said the girl, rising to her feet and going over to the window.

"i don't know how we could manage without him," answered the elder
woman querulously.

sibyl vane tossed her head and laughed.  "we don't want him any more,
mother.  prince charming rules life for us now." then she paused.  a
rose shook in her blood and shadowed her cheeks.  quick breath parted
the petals of her lips.  they trembled.  some southern wind of passion
swept over her and stirred the dainty folds of her dress.  "i love
him," she said simply.

"foolish child! foolish child!" was the parrot-phrase flung in answer.
the waving of crooked, false-jewelled fingers gave grotesqueness to the
words.

the girl laughed again.  the joy of a caged bird was in her voice.  her
eyes caught the melody and echoed it in radiance, then closed for a
moment, as though to hide their secret.  when they opened, the mist of
a dream had passed across them.

thin-lipped wisdom spoke at her from the worn chair, hinted at
prudence, quoted from that book of cowardice whose author apes the name
of common sense.  she did not listen.  she was free in her prison of
passion.  her prince, prince charming, was with her.  she had called on
memory to remake him.  she had sent her soul to search for him, and it
had brought him back.  his kiss burned again upon her mouth.  her
eyelids were warm with his breath.

then wisdom altered its method and spoke of espial and discovery.  this
young man might be rich.  if so, marriage should be thought of.
against the shell of her ear broke the waves of worldly cunning.  the
arrows of craft shot by her.  she saw the thin lips moving, and smiled.

suddenly she felt the need to speak.  the wordy silence troubled her.
"mother, mother," she cried, "why does he love me so much?  i know why
i love him.  i love him because he is like what love himself should be.
but what does he see in me?  i am not worthy of him.  and yet--why, i
cannot tell--though i feel so much beneath him, i don't feel humble.  i
feel proud, terribly proud.  mother, did you love my father as i love
prince charming?"

the elder woman grew pale beneath the coarse powder that daubed her
cheeks, and her dry lips twitched with a spasm of pain.  sybil rushed
to her, flung her arms round her neck, and kissed her.  "forgive me,
mother.  i know it pains you to talk about our father.  but it only
pains you because you loved him so much.  don't look so sad.  i am as
happy to-day as you were twenty years ago.  ah! let me be happy for
ever!"

"my child, you are far too young to think of falling in love.  besides,
what do you know of this young man?  you don't even know his name.  the
whole thing is most inconvenient, and really, when james is going away
to australia, and i have so much to think of, i must say that you
should have shown more consideration.  however, as i said before, if he
is rich ..."

"ah!  mother, mother, let me be happy!"

mrs. vane glanced at her, and with one of those false theatrical
gestures that so often become a mode of second nature to a
stage-player, clasped her in her arms.  at this moment, the door opened
and a young lad with rough brown hair came into the room.  he was
thick-set of figure, and his hands and feet were large and somewhat
clumsy in movement.  he was not so finely bred as his sister.  one
would hardly have guessed the close relationship that existed between
them.  mrs. vane fixed her eyes on him and intensified her smile.  she
mentally elevated her son to the dignity of an audience.  she felt sure
that the _tableau_ was interesting.

"you might keep some of your kisses for me, sibyl, i think," said the
lad with a good-natured grumble.

"ah! but you don't like being kissed, jim," she cried.  "you are a
dreadful old bear."  and she ran across the room and hugged him.

james vane looked into his sister's face with tenderness.  "i want you
to come out with me for a walk, sibyl.  i don't suppose i shall ever
see this horrid london again.  i am sure i don't want to."

"my son, don't say such dreadful things," murmured mrs. vane, taking up
a tawdry theatrical dress, with a sigh, and beginning to patch it.  she
felt a little disappointed that he had not joined the group.  it would
have increased the theatrical picturesqueness of the situation.

"why not, mother?  i mean it."

"you pain me, my son.  i trust you will return from australia in a
position of affluence.  i believe there is no society of any kind in
the colonies--nothing that i would call society--so when you have made
your fortune, you must come back and assert yourself in london."

"society!" muttered the lad.  "i don't want to know anything about
that.  i should like to make some money to take you and sibyl off the
stage.  i hate it."

"oh, jim!" said sibyl, laughing, "how unkind of you!  but are you
really going for a walk with me?  that will be nice!  i was afraid you
were going to say good-bye to some of your friends--to tom hardy, who
gave you that hideous pipe, or ned langton, who makes fun of you for
smoking it.  it is very sweet of you to let me have your last
afternoon.  where shall we go?  let us go to the park."

"i am too shabby," he answered, frowning.  "only swell people go to the
park."

"nonsense, jim," she whispered, stroking the sleeve of his coat.

he hesitated for a moment.  "very well," he said at last, "but don't be
too long dressing."  she danced out of the door.  one could hear her
singing as she ran upstairs.  her little feet pattered overhead.

he walked up and down the room two or three times.  then he turned to
the still figure in the chair.  "mother, are my things ready?" he asked.

"quite ready, james," she answered, keeping her eyes on her work.  for
some months past she had felt ill at ease when she was alone with this
rough stern son of hers.  her shallow secret nature was troubled when
their eyes met.  she used to wonder if he suspected anything.  the
silence, for he made no other observation, became intolerable to her.
she began to complain.  women defend themselves by attacking, just as
they attack by sudden and strange surrenders.  "i hope you will be
contented, james, with your sea-faring life," she said.  "you must
remember that it is your own choice.  you might have entered a
solicitor's office.  solicitors are a very respectable class, and in
the country often dine with the best families."

"i hate offices, and i hate clerks," he replied.  "but you are quite
right.  i have chosen my own life.  all i say is, watch over sibyl.
don't let her come to any harm.  mother, you must watch over her."

"james, you really talk very strangely.  of course i watch over sibyl."

"i hear a gentleman comes every night to the theatre and goes behind to
talk to her.  is that right?  what about that?"

"you are speaking about things you don't understand, james.  in the
profession we are accustomed to receive a great deal of most gratifying
attention.  i myself used to receive many bouquets at one time.  that
was when acting was really understood.  as for sibyl, i do not know at
present whether her attachment is serious or not.  but there is no
doubt that the young man in question is a perfect gentleman.  he is
always most polite to me.  besides, he has the appearance of being
rich, and the flowers he sends are lovely."

"you don't know his name, though," said the lad harshly.

"no," answered his mother with a placid expression in her face.  "he
has not yet revealed his real name.  i think it is quite romantic of
him.  he is probably a member of the aristocracy."

james vane bit his lip.  "watch over sibyl, mother," he cried, "watch
over her."

"my son, you distress me very much.  sibyl is always under my special
care.  of course, if this gentleman is wealthy, there is no reason why
she should not contract an alliance with him.  i trust he is one of the
aristocracy.  he has all the appearance of it, i must say.  it might be
a most brilliant marriage for sibyl.  they would make a charming
couple.  his good looks are really quite remarkable; everybody notices
them."

the lad muttered something to himself and drummed on the window-pane
with his coarse fingers.  he had just turned round to say something
when the door opened and sibyl ran in.

"how serious you both are!" she cried.  "what is the matter?"

"nothing," he answered.  "i suppose one must be serious sometimes.
good-bye, mother; i will have my dinner at five o'clock. everything is
packed, except my shirts, so you need not trouble."

"good-bye, my son," she answered with a bow of strained stateliness.

she was extremely annoyed at the tone he had adopted with her, and
there was something in his look that had made her feel afraid.

"kiss me, mother," said the girl.  her flowerlike lips touched the
withered cheek and warmed its frost.

"my child! my child!" cried mrs. vane, looking up to the ceiling in
search of an imaginary gallery.

"come, sibyl," said her brother impatiently.  he hated his mother's
affectations.

they went out into the flickering, wind-blown sunlight and strolled
down the dreary euston road.  the passersby glanced in wonder at the
sullen heavy youth who, in coarse, ill-fitting clothes, was in the
company of such a graceful, refined-looking girl.  he was like a common
gardener walking with a rose.

jim frowned from time to time when he caught the inquisitive glance of
some stranger.  he had that dislike of being stared at, which comes on
geniuses late in life and never leaves the commonplace.  sibyl,
however, was quite unconscious of the effect she was producing.  her
love was trembling in laughter on her lips.  she was thinking of prince
charming, and, that she might think of him all the more, she did not
talk of him, but prattled on about the ship in which jim was going to
sail, about the gold he was certain to find, about the wonderful
heiress whose life he was to save from the wicked, red-shirted
bushrangers.  for he was not to remain a sailor, or a supercargo, or
whatever he was going to be.  oh, no!  a sailor's existence was
dreadful.  fancy being cooped up in a horrid ship, with the hoarse,
hump-backed waves trying to get in, and a black wind blowing the masts
down and tearing the sails into long screaming ribands!  he was to
leave the vessel at melbourne, bid a polite good-bye to the captain,
and go off at once to the gold-fields. before a week was over he was to
come across a large nugget of pure gold, the largest nugget that had
ever been discovered, and bring it down to the coast in a waggon
guarded by six mounted policemen.  the bushrangers were to attack them
three times, and be defeated with immense slaughter.  or, no.  he was
not to go to the gold-fields at all.  they were horrid places, where
men got intoxicated, and shot each other in bar-rooms, and used bad
language.  he was to be a nice sheep-farmer, and one evening, as he was
riding home, he was to see the beautiful heiress being carried off by a
robber on a black horse, and give chase, and rescue her.  of course,
she would fall in love with him, and he with her, and they would get
married, and come home, and live in an immense house in london.  yes,
there were delightful things in store for him.  but he must be very
good, and not lose his temper, or spend his money foolishly.  she was
only a year older than he was, but she knew so much more of life.  he
must be sure, also, to write to her by every mail, and to say his
prayers each night before he went to sleep.  god was very good, and
would watch over him.  she would pray for him, too, and in a few years
he would come back quite rich and happy.

the lad listened sulkily to her and made no answer.  he was heart-sick
at leaving home.

yet it was not this alone that made him gloomy and morose.
inexperienced though he was, he had still a strong sense of the danger
of sibyl's position.  this young dandy who was making love to her could
mean her no good.  he was a gentleman, and he hated him for that, hated
him through some curious race-instinct for which he could not account,
and which for that reason was all the more dominant within him.  he was
conscious also of the shallowness and vanity of his mother's nature,
and in that saw infinite peril for sibyl and sibyl's happiness.
children begin by loving their parents; as they grow older they judge
them; sometimes they forgive them.

his mother!  he had something on his mind to ask of her, something that
he had brooded on for many months of silence.  a chance phrase that he
had heard at the theatre, a whispered sneer that had reached his ears
one night as he waited at the stage-door, had set loose a train of
horrible thoughts.  he remembered it as if it had been the lash of a
hunting-crop across his face.  his brows knit together into a wedge-like
furrow, and with a twitch of pain he bit his underlip.

"you are not listening to a word i am saying, jim," cried sibyl, "and i
am making the most delightful plans for your future.  do say something."

"what do you want me to say?"

"oh! that you will be a good boy and not forget us," she answered,
smiling at him.

he shrugged his shoulders.  "you are more likely to forget me than i am
to forget you, sibyl."

she flushed.  "what do you mean, jim?" she asked.

"you have a new friend, i hear.  who is he?  why have you not told me
about him?  he means you no good."

"stop, jim!" she exclaimed.  "you must not say anything against him.  i
love him."

"why, you don't even know his name," answered the lad.  "who is he?  i
have a right to know."

"he is called prince charming.  don't you like the name.  oh! you silly
boy! you should never forget it.  if you only saw him, you would think
him the most wonderful person in the world.  some day you will meet
him--when you come back from australia.  you will like him so much.
everybody likes him, and i ... love him.  i wish you could come to the
theatre to-night. he is going to be there, and i am to play juliet.
oh! how i shall play it!  fancy, jim, to be in love and play juliet!
to have him sitting there!  to play for his delight!  i am afraid i may
frighten the company, frighten or enthrall them.  to be in love is to
surpass one's self.  poor dreadful mr. isaacs will be shouting 'genius'
to his loafers at the bar.  he has preached me as a dogma; to-night he
will announce me as a revelation.  i feel it.  and it is all his, his
only, prince charming, my wonderful lover, my god of graces.  but i am
poor beside him.  poor?  what does that matter?  when poverty creeps in
at the door, love flies in through the window.  our proverbs want
rewriting.  they were made in winter, and it is summer now; spring-time
for me, i think, a very dance of blossoms in blue skies."

"he is a gentleman," said the lad sullenly.

"a prince!" she cried musically.  "what more do you want?"

"he wants to enslave you."

"i shudder at the thought of being free."

"i want you to beware of him."

"to see him is to worship him; to know him is to trust him."

"sibyl, you are mad about him."

she laughed and took his arm.  "you dear old jim, you talk as if you
were a hundred.  some day you will be in love yourself.  then you will
know what it is.  don't look so sulky.  surely you should be glad to
think that, though you are going away, you leave me happier than i have
ever been before.  life has been hard for us both, terribly hard and
difficult.  but it will be different now.  you are going to a new
world, and i have found one.  here are two chairs; let us sit down and
see the smart people go by."

they took their seats amidst a crowd of watchers.  the tulip-beds
across the road flamed like throbbing rings of fire.  a white
dust--tremulous cloud of orris-root it seemed--hung in the panting air.
the brightly coloured parasols danced and dipped like monstrous
butterflies.

she made her brother talk of himself, his hopes, his prospects.  he
spoke slowly and with effort.  they passed words to each other as
players at a game pass counters.  sibyl felt oppressed.  she could not
communicate her joy.  a faint smile curving that sullen mouth was all
the echo she could win.  after some time she became silent.  suddenly
she caught a glimpse of golden hair and laughing lips, and in an open
carriage with two ladies dorian gray drove past.

she started to her feet.  "there he is!" she cried.

"who?" said jim vane.

"prince charming," she answered, looking after the victoria.

he jumped up and seized her roughly by the arm.  "show him to me.
which is he?  point him out.  i must see him!" he exclaimed; but at
that moment the duke of berwick's four-in-hand came between, and when
it had left the space clear, the carriage had swept out of the park.

"he is gone," murmured sibyl sadly.  "i wish you had seen him."

"i wish i had, for as sure as there is a god in heaven, if he ever does
you any wrong, i shall kill him."

she looked at him in horror.  he repeated his words.  they cut the air
like a dagger.  the people round began to gape.  a lady standing close
to her tittered.

"come away, jim; come away," she whispered.  he followed her doggedly
as she passed through the crowd.  he felt glad at what he had said.

when they reached the achilles statue, she turned round.  there was
pity in her eyes that became laughter on her lips.  she shook her head
at him.  "you are foolish, jim, utterly foolish; a bad-tempered boy,
that is all.  how can you say such horrible things?  you don't know
what you are talking about.  you are simply jealous and unkind.  ah!  i
wish you would fall in love.  love makes people good, and what you said
was wicked."

"i am sixteen," he answered, "and i know what i am about.  mother is no
help to you.  she doesn't understand how to look after you.  i wish now
that i was not going to australia at all.  i have a great mind to chuck
the whole thing up.  i would, if my articles hadn't been signed."

"oh, don't be so serious, jim.  you are like one of the heroes of those
silly melodramas mother used to be so fond of acting in.  i am not
going to quarrel with you.  i have seen him, and oh! to see him is
perfect happiness.  we won't quarrel.  i know you would never harm any
one i love, would you?"

"not as long as you love him, i suppose," was the sullen answer.

"i shall love him for ever!" she cried.

"and he?"

"for ever, too!"

"he had better."

she shrank from him.  then she laughed and put her hand on his arm.  he
was merely a boy.

at the marble arch they hailed an omnibus, which left them close to
their shabby home in the euston road.  it was after five o'clock, and
sibyl had to lie down for a couple of hours before acting.  jim
insisted that she should do so.  he said that he would sooner part with
her when their mother was not present.  she would be sure to make a
scene, and he detested scenes of every kind.

in sybil's own room they parted.  there was jealousy in the lad's
heart, and a fierce murderous hatred of the stranger who, as it seemed
to him, had come between them.  yet, when her arms were flung round his
neck, and her fingers strayed through his hair, he softened and kissed
her with real affection.  there were tears in his eyes as he went
downstairs.

his mother was waiting for him below.  she grumbled at his
unpunctuality, as he entered.  he made no answer, but sat down to his
meagre meal.  the flies buzzed round the table and crawled over the
stained cloth.  through the rumble of omnibuses, and the clatter of
street-cabs, he could hear the droning voice devouring each minute that
was left to him.

after some time, he thrust away his plate and put his head in his
hands.  he felt that he had a right to know.  it should have been told
to him before, if it was as he suspected.  leaden with fear, his mother
watched him.  words dropped mechanically from her lips.  a tattered
lace handkerchief twitched in her fingers.  when the clock struck six,
he got up and went to the door.  then he turned back and looked at her.
their eyes met.  in hers he saw a wild appeal for mercy.  it enraged
him.

"mother, i have something to ask you," he said.  her eyes wandered
vaguely about the room.  she made no answer.  "tell me the truth.  i
have a right to know.  were you married to my father?"

she heaved a deep sigh.  it was a sigh of relief.  the terrible moment,
the moment that night and day, for weeks and months, she had dreaded,
had come at last, and yet she felt no terror.  indeed, in some measure
it was a disappointment to her.  the vulgar directness of the question
called for a direct answer.  the situation had not been gradually led
up to.  it was crude.  it reminded her of a bad rehearsal.

"no," she answered, wondering at the harsh simplicity of life.

"my father was a scoundrel then!" cried the lad, clenching his fists.

she shook her head.  "i knew he was not free.  we loved each other very
much.  if he had lived, he would have made provision for us.  don't
speak against him, my son.  he was your father, and a gentleman.
indeed, he was highly connected."

an oath broke from his lips.  "i don't care for myself," he exclaimed,
"but don't let sibyl.... it is a gentleman, isn't it, who is in love
with her, or says he is?  highly connected, too, i suppose."

for a moment a hideous sense of humiliation came over the woman.  her
head drooped.  she wiped her eyes with shaking hands.  "sibyl has a
mother," she murmured; "i had none."

the lad was touched.  he went towards her, and stooping down, he kissed
her.  "i am sorry if i have pained you by asking about my father," he
said, "but i could not help it.  i must go now.  good-bye. don't forget
that you will have only one child now to look after, and believe me
that if this man wrongs my sister, i will find out who he is, track him
down, and kill him like a dog.  i swear it."

the exaggerated folly of the threat, the passionate gesture that
accompanied it, the mad melodramatic words, made life seem more vivid
to her.  she was familiar with the atmosphere.  she breathed more
freely, and for the first time for many months she really admired her
son.  she would have liked to have continued the scene on the same
emotional scale, but he cut her short.  trunks had to be carried down
and mufflers looked for.  the lodging-house drudge bustled in and out.
there was the bargaining with the cabman.  the moment was lost in
vulgar details.  it was with a renewed feeling of disappointment that
she waved the tattered lace handkerchief from the window, as her son
drove away.  she was conscious that a great opportunity had been
wasted.  she consoled herself by telling sibyl how desolate she felt
her life would be, now that she had only one child to look after.  she
remembered the phrase.  it had pleased her.  of the threat she said
nothing.  it was vividly and dramatically expressed.  she felt that
they would all laugh at it some day.



chapter 6

"i suppose you have heard the news, basil?" said lord henry that
evening as hallward was shown into a little private room at the bristol
where dinner had been laid for three.

"no, harry," answered the artist, giving his hat and coat to the bowing
waiter.  "what is it?  nothing about politics, i hope!  they don't
interest me.  there is hardly a single person in the house of commons
worth painting, though many of them would be the better for a little
whitewashing."

"dorian gray is engaged to be married," said lord henry, watching him
as he spoke.

hallward started and then frowned.  "dorian engaged to be married!" he
cried.  "impossible!"

"it is perfectly true."

"to whom?"

"to some little actress or other."

"i can't believe it.  dorian is far too sensible."

"dorian is far too wise not to do foolish things now and then, my dear
basil."

"marriage is hardly a thing that one can do now and then, harry."

"except in america," rejoined lord henry languidly.  "but i didn't say
he was married.  i said he was engaged to be married.  there is a great
difference.  i have a distinct remembrance of being married, but i have
no recollection at all of being engaged.  i am inclined to think that i
never was engaged."

"but think of dorian's birth, and position, and wealth.  it would be
absurd for him to marry so much beneath him."

"if you want to make him marry this girl, tell him that, basil.  he is
sure to do it, then.  whenever a man does a thoroughly stupid thing, it
is always from the noblest motives."

"i hope the girl is good, harry.  i don't want to see dorian tied to
some vile creature, who might degrade his nature and ruin his
intellect."

"oh, she is better than good--she is beautiful," murmured lord henry,
sipping a glass of vermouth and orange-bitters. "dorian says she is
beautiful, and he is not often wrong about things of that kind.  your
portrait of him has quickened his appreciation of the personal
appearance of other people.  it has had that excellent effect, amongst
others.  we are to see her to-night, if that boy doesn't forget his
appointment."

"are you serious?"

"quite serious, basil.  i should be miserable if i thought i should
ever be more serious than i am at the present moment."

"but do you approve of it, harry?" asked the painter, walking up and
down the room and biting his lip.  "you can't approve of it, possibly.
it is some silly infatuation."

"i never approve, or disapprove, of anything now.  it is an absurd
attitude to take towards life.  we are not sent into the world to air
our moral prejudices.  i never take any notice of what common people
say, and i never interfere with what charming people do.  if a
personality fascinates me, whatever mode of expression that personality
selects is absolutely delightful to me.  dorian gray falls in love with
a beautiful girl who acts juliet, and proposes to marry her.  why not?
if he wedded messalina, he would be none the less interesting.  you
know i am not a champion of marriage.  the real drawback to marriage is
that it makes one unselfish.  and unselfish people are colourless.
they lack individuality.  still, there are certain temperaments that
marriage makes more complex.  they retain their egotism, and add to it
many other egos.  they are forced to have more than one life.  they
become more highly organized, and to be highly organized is, i should
fancy, the object of man's existence.  besides, every experience is of
value, and whatever one may say against marriage, it is certainly an
experience.  i hope that dorian gray will make this girl his wife,
passionately adore her for six months, and then suddenly become
fascinated by some one else.  he would be a wonderful study."

"you don't mean a single word of all that, harry; you know you don't.
if dorian gray's life were spoiled, no one would be sorrier than
yourself.  you are much better than you pretend to be."

lord henry laughed.  "the reason we all like to think so well of others
is that we are all afraid for ourselves.  the basis of optimism is
sheer terror.  we think that we are generous because we credit our
neighbour with the possession of those virtues that are likely to be a
benefit to us.  we praise the banker that we may overdraw our account,
and find good qualities in the highwayman in the hope that he may spare
our pockets.  i mean everything that i have said.  i have the greatest
contempt for optimism.  as for a spoiled life, no life is spoiled but
one whose growth is arrested.  if you want to mar a nature, you have
merely to reform it.  as for marriage, of course that would be silly,
but there are other and more interesting bonds between men and women.
i will certainly encourage them.  they have the charm of being
fashionable.  but here is dorian himself.  he will tell you more than i
can."

"my dear harry, my dear basil, you must both congratulate me!" said the
lad, throwing off his evening cape with its satin-lined wings and
shaking each of his friends by the hand in turn.  "i have never been so
happy.  of course, it is sudden--all really delightful things are.  and
yet it seems to me to be the one thing i have been looking for all my
life." he was flushed with excitement and pleasure, and looked
extraordinarily handsome.

"i hope you will always be very happy, dorian," said hallward, "but i
don't quite forgive you for not having let me know of your engagement.
you let harry know."

"and i don't forgive you for being late for dinner," broke in lord
henry, putting his hand on the lad's shoulder and smiling as he spoke.
"come, let us sit down and try what the new _chef_ here is like, and then
you will tell us how it all came about."

"there is really not much to tell," cried dorian as they took their
seats at the small round table.  "what happened was simply this.  after
i left you yesterday evening, harry, i dressed, had some dinner at that
little italian restaurant in rupert street you introduced me to, and
went down at eight o'clock to the theatre.  sibyl was playing rosalind.
of course, the scenery was dreadful and the orlando absurd.  but sibyl!
you should have seen her!  when she came on in her boy's clothes, she
was perfectly wonderful.  she wore a moss-coloured velvet jerkin with
cinnamon sleeves, slim, brown, cross-gartered hose, a dainty little
green cap with a hawk's feather caught in a jewel, and a hooded cloak
lined with dull red.  she had never seemed to me more exquisite.  she
had all the delicate grace of that tanagra figurine that you have in
your studio, basil.  her hair clustered round her face like dark leaves
round a pale rose.  as for her acting--well, you shall see her
to-night. she is simply a born artist.  i sat in the dingy box
absolutely enthralled.  i forgot that i was in london and in the
nineteenth century.  i was away with my love in a forest that no man
had ever seen.  after the performance was over, i went behind and spoke
to her.  as we were sitting together, suddenly there came into her eyes
a look that i had never seen there before.  my lips moved towards hers.
we kissed each other.  i can't describe to you what i felt at that
moment.  it seemed to me that all my life had been narrowed to one
perfect point of rose-coloured joy.  she trembled all over and shook
like a white narcissus.  then she flung herself on her knees and kissed
my hands.  i feel that i should not tell you all this, but i can't help
it.  of course, our engagement is a dead secret.  she has not even told
her own mother.  i don't know what my guardians will say.  lord radley
is sure to be furious.  i don't care.  i shall be of age in less than a
year, and then i can do what i like.  i have been right, basil, haven't
i, to take my love out of poetry and to find my wife in shakespeare's
plays?  lips that shakespeare taught to speak have whispered their
secret in my ear.  i have had the arms of rosalind around me, and
kissed juliet on the mouth."

"yes, dorian, i suppose you were right," said hallward slowly.

"have you seen her to-day?" asked lord henry.

dorian gray shook his head.  "i left her in the forest of arden; i
shall find her in an orchard in verona."

lord henry sipped his champagne in a meditative manner.  "at what
particular point did you mention the word marriage, dorian?  and what
did she say in answer?  perhaps you forgot all about it."

"my dear harry, i did not treat it as a business transaction, and i did
not make any formal proposal.  i told her that i loved her, and she
said she was not worthy to be my wife.  not worthy!  why, the whole
world is nothing to me compared with her."

"women are wonderfully practical," murmured lord henry, "much more
practical than we are.  in situations of that kind we often forget to
say anything about marriage, and they always remind us."

hallward laid his hand upon his arm.  "don't, harry.  you have annoyed
dorian.  he is not like other men.  he would never bring misery upon
any one.  his nature is too fine for that."

lord henry looked across the table.  "dorian is never annoyed with me,"
he answered.  "i asked the question for the best reason possible, for
the only reason, indeed, that excuses one for asking any
question--simple curiosity.  i have a theory that it is always the
women who propose to us, and not we who propose to the women.  except,
of course, in middle-class life.  but then the middle classes are not
modern."

dorian gray laughed, and tossed his head.  "you are quite incorrigible,
harry; but i don't mind.  it is impossible to be angry with you.  when
you see sibyl vane, you will feel that the man who could wrong her
would be a beast, a beast without a heart.  i cannot understand how any
one can wish to shame the thing he loves.  i love sibyl vane.  i want
to place her on a pedestal of gold and to see the world worship the
woman who is mine.  what is marriage?  an irrevocable vow.  you mock at
it for that.  ah! don't mock.  it is an irrevocable vow that i want to
take.  her trust makes me faithful, her belief makes me good.  when i
am with her, i regret all that you have taught me.  i become different
from what you have known me to be.  i am changed, and the mere touch of
sibyl vane's hand makes me forget you and all your wrong, fascinating,
poisonous, delightful theories."

"and those are ...?" asked lord henry, helping himself to some salad.

"oh, your theories about life, your theories about love, your theories
about pleasure.  all your theories, in fact, harry."

"pleasure is the only thing worth having a theory about," he answered
in his slow melodious voice.  "but i am afraid i cannot claim my theory
as my own.  it belongs to nature, not to me.  pleasure is nature's
test, her sign of approval.  when we are happy, we are always good, but
when we are good, we are not always happy."

"ah! but what do you mean by good?" cried basil hallward.

"yes," echoed dorian, leaning back in his chair and looking at lord
henry over the heavy clusters of purple-lipped irises that stood in the
centre of the table, "what do you mean by good, harry?"

"to be good is to be in harmony with one's self," he replied, touching
the thin stem of his glass with his pale, fine-pointed fingers.
"discord is to be forced to be in harmony with others.  one's own
life--that is the important thing.  as for the lives of one's
neighbours, if one wishes to be a prig or a puritan, one can flaunt
one's moral views about them, but they are not one's concern.  besides,
individualism has really the higher aim.  modern morality consists in
accepting the standard of one's age.  i consider that for any man of
culture to accept the standard of his age is a form of the grossest
immorality."

"but, surely, if one lives merely for one's self, harry, one pays a
terrible price for doing so?" suggested the painter.

"yes, we are overcharged for everything nowadays.  i should fancy that
the real tragedy of the poor is that they can afford nothing but
self-denial. beautiful sins, like beautiful things, are the privilege
of the rich."

"one has to pay in other ways but money."

"what sort of ways, basil?"

"oh!  i should fancy in remorse, in suffering, in ... well, in the
consciousness of degradation."

lord henry shrugged his shoulders.  "my dear fellow, mediaeval art is
charming, but mediaeval emotions are out of date.  one can use them in
fiction, of course.  but then the only things that one can use in
fiction are the things that one has ceased to use in fact.  believe me,
no civilized man ever regrets a pleasure, and no uncivilized man ever
knows what a pleasure is."

"i know what pleasure is," cried dorian gray.  "it is to adore some
one."

"that is certainly better than being adored," he answered, toying with
some fruits.  "being adored is a nuisance.  women treat us just as
humanity treats its gods.  they worship us, and are always bothering us
to do something for them."

"i should have said that whatever they ask for they had first given to
us," murmured the lad gravely.  "they create love in our natures.  they
have a right to demand it back."

"that is quite true, dorian," cried hallward.

"nothing is ever quite true," said lord henry.

"this is," interrupted dorian.  "you must admit, harry, that women give
to men the very gold of their lives."

"possibly," he sighed, "but they invariably want it back in such very
small change.  that is the worry.  women, as some witty frenchman once
put it, inspire us with the desire to do masterpieces and always
prevent us from carrying them out."

"harry, you are dreadful!  i don't know why i like you so much."

"you will always like me, dorian," he replied.  "will you have some
coffee, you fellows?  waiter, bring coffee, and _fine-champagne_, and
some cigarettes.  no, don't mind the cigarettes--i have some.  basil, i
can't allow you to smoke cigars.  you must have a cigarette.  a
cigarette is the perfect type of a perfect pleasure.  it is exquisite,
and it leaves one unsatisfied.  what more can one want?  yes, dorian,
you will always be fond of me.  i represent to you all the sins you
have never had the courage to commit."

"what nonsense you talk, harry!" cried the lad, taking a light from a
fire-breathing silver dragon that the waiter had placed on the table.
"let us go down to the theatre.  when sibyl comes on the stage you will
have a new ideal of life.  she will represent something to you that you
have never known."

"i have known everything," said lord henry, with a tired look in his
eyes, "but i am always ready for a new emotion.  i am afraid, however,
that, for me at any rate, there is no such thing.  still, your
wonderful girl may thrill me.  i love acting.  it is so much more real
than life.  let us go.  dorian, you will come with me.  i am so sorry,
basil, but there is only room for two in the brougham.  you must follow
us in a hansom."

they got up and put on their coats, sipping their coffee standing.  the
painter was silent and preoccupied.  there was a gloom over him.  he
could not bear this marriage, and yet it seemed to him to be better
than many other things that might have happened.  after a few minutes,
they all passed downstairs.  he drove off by himself, as had been
arranged, and watched the flashing lights of the little brougham in
front of him.  a strange sense of loss came over him.  he felt that
dorian gray would never again be to him all that he had been in the
past.  life had come between them.... his eyes darkened, and the
crowded flaring streets became blurred to his eyes.  when the cab drew
up at the theatre, it seemed to him that he had grown years older.



chapter 7

for some reason or other, the house was crowded that night, and the fat
jew manager who met them at the door was beaming from ear to ear with
an oily tremulous smile.  he escorted them to their box with a sort of
pompous humility, waving his fat jewelled hands and talking at the top
of his voice.  dorian gray loathed him more than ever.  he felt as if
he had come to look for miranda and had been met by caliban.  lord
henry, upon the other hand, rather liked him.  at least he declared he
did, and insisted on shaking him by the hand and assuring him that he
was proud to meet a man who had discovered a real genius and gone
bankrupt over a poet.  hallward amused himself with watching the faces
in the pit.  the heat was terribly oppressive, and the huge sunlight
flamed like a monstrous dahlia with petals of yellow fire.  the youths
in the gallery had taken off their coats and waistcoats and hung them
over the side.  they talked to each other across the theatre and shared
their oranges with the tawdry girls who sat beside them.  some women
were laughing in the pit.  their voices were horribly shrill and
discordant.  the sound of the popping of corks came from the bar.

"what a place to find one's divinity in!" said lord henry.

"yes!" answered dorian gray.  "it was here i found her, and she is
divine beyond all living things.  when she acts, you will forget
everything.  these common rough people, with their coarse faces and
brutal gestures, become quite different when she is on the stage.  they
sit silently and watch her.  they weep and laugh as she wills them to
do.  she makes them as responsive as a violin.  she spiritualizes them,
and one feels that they are of the same flesh and blood as one's self."

"the same flesh and blood as one's self!  oh, i hope not!" exclaimed
lord henry, who was scanning the occupants of the gallery through his
opera-glass.

"don't pay any attention to him, dorian," said the painter.  "i
understand what you mean, and i believe in this girl.  any one you love
must be marvellous, and any girl who has the effect you describe must
be fine and noble.  to spiritualize one's age--that is something worth
doing.  if this girl can give a soul to those who have lived without
one, if she can create the sense of beauty in people whose lives have
been sordid and ugly, if she can strip them of their selfishness and
lend them tears for sorrows that are not their own, she is worthy of
all your adoration, worthy of the adoration of the world.  this
marriage is quite right.  i did not think so at first, but i admit it
now.  the gods made sibyl vane for you.  without her you would have
been incomplete."

"thanks, basil," answered dorian gray, pressing his hand.  "i knew that
you would understand me.  harry is so cynical, he terrifies me.  but
here is the orchestra.  it is quite dreadful, but it only lasts for
about five minutes.  then the curtain rises, and you will see the girl
to whom i am going to give all my life, to whom i have given everything
that is good in me."

a quarter of an hour afterwards, amidst an extraordinary turmoil of
applause, sibyl vane stepped on to the stage.  yes, she was certainly
lovely to look at--one of the loveliest creatures, lord henry thought,
that he had ever seen.  there was something of the fawn in her shy
grace and startled eyes.  a faint blush, like the shadow of a rose in a
mirror of silver, came to her cheeks as she glanced at the crowded
enthusiastic house.  she stepped back a few paces and her lips seemed
to tremble.  basil hallward leaped to his feet and began to applaud.
motionless, and as one in a dream, sat dorian gray, gazing at her.
lord henry peered through his glasses, murmuring, "charming! charming!"

the scene was the hall of capulet's house, and romeo in his pilgrim's
dress had entered with mercutio and his other friends.  the band, such
as it was, struck up a few bars of music, and the dance began.  through
the crowd of ungainly, shabbily dressed actors, sibyl vane moved like a
creature from a finer world.  her body swayed, while she danced, as a
plant sways in the water.  the curves of her throat were the curves of
a white lily.  her hands seemed to be made of cool ivory.

yet she was curiously listless.  she showed no sign of joy when her
eyes rested on romeo.  the few words she had to speak--

    good pilgrim, you do wrong your hand too much,
        which mannerly devotion shows in this;
    for saints have hands that pilgrims' hands do touch,
        and palm to palm is holy palmers' kiss--

with the brief dialogue that follows, were spoken in a thoroughly
artificial manner.  the voice was exquisite, but from the point of view
of tone it was absolutely false.  it was wrong in colour.  it took away
all the life from the verse.  it made the passion unreal.

dorian gray grew pale as he watched her.  he was puzzled and anxious.
neither of his friends dared to say anything to him.  she seemed to
them to be absolutely incompetent.  they were horribly disappointed.

yet they felt that the true test of any juliet is the balcony scene of
the second act.  they waited for that.  if she failed there, there was
nothing in her.

she looked charming as she came out in the moonlight.  that could not
be denied.  but the staginess of her acting was unbearable, and grew
worse as she went on.  her gestures became absurdly artificial.  she
overemphasized everything that she had to say.  the beautiful passage--

    thou knowest the mask of night is on my face,
    else would a maiden blush bepaint my cheek
    for that which thou hast heard me speak to-night--

was declaimed with the painful precision of a schoolgirl who has been
taught to recite by some second-rate professor of elocution. when she
leaned over the balcony and came to those wonderful lines--

        although i joy in thee,
    i have no joy of this contract to-night:
    it is too rash, too unadvised, too sudden;
    too like the lightning, which doth cease to be
    ere one can say, "it lightens."  sweet, good-night!
    this bud of love by summer's ripening breath
    may prove a beauteous flower when next we meet--

she spoke the words as though they conveyed no meaning to her. it was
not nervousness. indeed, so far from being nervous, she was absolutely
self-contained. it was simply bad art. she was a complete failure.

even the common uneducated audience of the pit and gallery lost their
interest in the play. they got restless, and began to talk loudly and
to whistle. the jew manager, who was standing at the back of the
dress-circle, stamped and swore with rage. the only person unmoved was
the girl herself.

when the second act was over, there came a storm of hisses, and lord
henry got up from his chair and put on his coat.  "she is quite
beautiful, dorian," he said, "but she can't act.  let us go."

"i am going to see the play through," answered the lad, in a hard
bitter voice.  "i am awfully sorry that i have made you waste an
evening, harry.  i apologize to you both."

"my dear dorian, i should think miss vane was ill," interrupted
hallward.  "we will come some other night."

"i wish she were ill," he rejoined.  "but she seems to me to be simply
callous and cold.  she has entirely altered.  last night she was a
great artist.  this evening she is merely a commonplace mediocre
actress."

"don't talk like that about any one you love, dorian.  love is a more
wonderful thing than art."

"they are both simply forms of imitation," remarked lord henry.  "but
do let us go.  dorian, you must not stay here any longer.  it is not
good for one's morals to see bad acting.  besides, i don't suppose you
will want your wife to act, so what does it matter if she plays juliet
like a wooden doll?  she is very lovely, and if she knows as little
about life as she does about acting, she will be a delightful
experience.  there are only two kinds of people who are really
fascinating--people who know absolutely everything, and people who know
absolutely nothing.  good heavens, my dear boy, don't look so tragic!
the secret of remaining young is never to have an emotion that is
unbecoming.  come to the club with basil and myself.  we will smoke
cigarettes and drink to the beauty of sibyl vane.  she is beautiful.
what more can you want?"

"go away, harry," cried the lad.  "i want to be alone.  basil, you must
go.  ah! can't you see that my heart is breaking?"  the hot tears came
to his eyes.  his lips trembled, and rushing to the back of the box, he
leaned up against the wall, hiding his face in his hands.

"let us go, basil," said lord henry with a strange tenderness in his
voice, and the two young men passed out together.

a few moments afterwards the footlights flared up and the curtain rose
on the third act.  dorian gray went back to his seat.  he looked pale,
and proud, and indifferent.  the play dragged on, and seemed
interminable.  half of the audience went out, tramping in heavy boots
and laughing.  the whole thing was a _fiasco_.  the last act was played
to almost empty benches.  the curtain went down on a titter and some
groans.

as soon as it was over, dorian gray rushed behind the scenes into the
greenroom.  the girl was standing there alone, with a look of triumph
on her face.  her eyes were lit with an exquisite fire.  there was a
radiance about her.  her parted lips were smiling over some secret of
their own.

when he entered, she looked at him, and an expression of infinite joy
came over her.  "how badly i acted to-night, dorian!" she cried.

"horribly!" he answered, gazing at her in amazement.  "horribly!  it
was dreadful.  are you ill?  you have no idea what it was.  you have no
idea what i suffered."

the girl smiled.  "dorian," she answered, lingering over his name with
long-drawn music in her voice, as though it were sweeter than honey to
the red petals of her mouth.  "dorian, you should have understood.  but
you understand now, don't you?"

"understand what?" he asked, angrily.

"why i was so bad to-night. why i shall always be bad.  why i shall
never act well again."

he shrugged his shoulders.  "you are ill, i suppose.  when you are ill
you shouldn't act.  you make yourself ridiculous.  my friends were
bored.  i was bored."

she seemed not to listen to him.  she was transfigured with joy.  an
ecstasy of happiness dominated her.

"dorian, dorian," she cried, "before i knew you, acting was the one
reality of my life.  it was only in the theatre that i lived.  i
thought that it was all true.  i was rosalind one night and portia the
other.  the joy of beatrice was my joy, and the sorrows of cordelia
were mine also.  i believed in everything.  the common people who acted
with me seemed to me to be godlike.  the painted scenes were my world.
i knew nothing but shadows, and i thought them real.  you came--oh, my
beautiful love!--and you freed my soul from prison.  you taught me what
reality really is.  to-night, for the first time in my life, i saw
through the hollowness, the sham, the silliness of the empty pageant in
which i had always played.  to-night, for the first time, i became
conscious that the romeo was hideous, and old, and painted, that the
moonlight in the orchard was false, that the scenery was vulgar, and
that the words i had to speak were unreal, were not my words, were not
what i wanted to say.  you had brought me something higher, something
of which all art is but a reflection.  you had made me understand what
love really is.  my love!  my love!  prince charming!  prince of life!
i have grown sick of shadows.  you are more to me than all art can ever
be.  what have i to do with the puppets of a play?  when i came on
to-night, i could not understand how it was that everything had gone
from me.  i thought that i was going to be wonderful.  i found that i
could do nothing.  suddenly it dawned on my soul what it all meant.
the knowledge was exquisite to me.  i heard them hissing, and i smiled.
what could they know of love such as ours?  take me away, dorian--take
me away with you, where we can be quite alone.  i hate the stage.  i
might mimic a passion that i do not feel, but i cannot mimic one that
burns me like fire.  oh, dorian, dorian, you understand now what it
signifies?  even if i could do it, it would be profanation for me to
play at being in love.  you have made me see that."

he flung himself down on the sofa and turned away his face.  "you have
killed my love," he muttered.

she looked at him in wonder and laughed.  he made no answer.  she came
across to him, and with her little fingers stroked his hair.  she knelt
down and pressed his hands to her lips.  he drew them away, and a
shudder ran through him.

then he leaped up and went to the door.  "yes," he cried, "you have
killed my love.  you used to stir my imagination.  now you don't even
stir my curiosity.  you simply produce no effect.  i loved you because
you were marvellous, because you had genius and intellect, because you
realized the dreams of great poets and gave shape and substance to the
shadows of art.  you have thrown it all away.  you are shallow and
stupid.  my god! how mad i was to love you!  what a fool i have been!
you are nothing to me now.  i will never see you again.  i will never
think of you.  i will never mention your name.  you don't know what you
were to me, once.  why, once ... oh, i can't bear to think of it!  i
wish i had never laid eyes upon you!  you have spoiled the romance of
my life.  how little you can know of love, if you say it mars your art!
without your art, you are nothing.  i would have made you famous,
splendid, magnificent.  the world would have worshipped you, and you
would have borne my name.  what are you now?  a third-rate actress with
a pretty face."

the girl grew white, and trembled.  she clenched her hands together,
and her voice seemed to catch in her throat.  "you are not serious,
dorian?" she murmured.  "you are acting."

"acting!  i leave that to you.  you do it so well," he answered
bitterly.

she rose from her knees and, with a piteous expression of pain in her
face, came across the room to him.  she put her hand upon his arm and
looked into his eyes.  he thrust her back.  "don't touch me!" he cried.

a low moan broke from her, and she flung herself at his feet and lay
there like a trampled flower.  "dorian, dorian, don't leave me!" she
whispered.  "i am so sorry i didn't act well.  i was thinking of you
all the time.  but i will try--indeed, i will try.  it came so suddenly
across me, my love for you.  i think i should never have known it if
you had not kissed me--if we had not kissed each other.  kiss me again,
my love.  don't go away from me.  i couldn't bear it.  oh! don't go
away from me.  my brother ... no; never mind.  he didn't mean it.  he
was in jest.... but you, oh! can't you forgive me for to-night? i will
work so hard and try to improve.  don't be cruel to me, because i love
you better than anything in the world.  after all, it is only once that
i have not pleased you.  but you are quite right, dorian.  i should
have shown myself more of an artist.  it was foolish of me, and yet i
couldn't help it.  oh, don't leave me, don't leave me." a fit of
passionate sobbing choked her.  she crouched on the floor like a
wounded thing, and dorian gray, with his beautiful eyes, looked down at
her, and his chiselled lips curled in exquisite disdain.  there is
always something ridiculous about the emotions of people whom one has
ceased to love.  sibyl vane seemed to him to be absurdly melodramatic.
her tears and sobs annoyed him.

"i am going," he said at last in his calm clear voice.  "i don't wish
to be unkind, but i can't see you again.  you have disappointed me."

she wept silently, and made no answer, but crept nearer.  her little
hands stretched blindly out, and appeared to be seeking for him.  he
turned on his heel and left the room.  in a few moments he was out of
the theatre.

where he went to he hardly knew.  he remembered wandering through dimly
lit streets, past gaunt, black-shadowed archways and evil-looking
houses.  women with hoarse voices and harsh laughter had called after
him.  drunkards had reeled by, cursing and chattering to themselves
like monstrous apes.  he had seen grotesque children huddled upon
door-steps, and heard shrieks and oaths from gloomy courts.

as the dawn was just breaking, he found himself close to covent garden.
the darkness lifted, and, flushed with faint fires, the sky hollowed
itself into a perfect pearl.  huge carts filled with nodding lilies
rumbled slowly down the polished empty street.  the air was heavy with
the perfume of the flowers, and their beauty seemed to bring him an
anodyne for his pain.  he followed into the market and watched the men
unloading their waggons.  a white-smocked carter offered him some
cherries.  he thanked him, wondered why he refused to accept any money
for them, and began to eat them listlessly.  they had been plucked at
midnight, and the coldness of the moon had entered into them.  a long
line of boys carrying crates of striped tulips, and of yellow and red
roses, defiled in front of him, threading their way through the huge,
jade-green piles of vegetables.  under the portico, with its grey,
sun-bleached pillars, loitered a troop of draggled bareheaded girls,
waiting for the auction to be over.  others crowded round the swinging
doors of the coffee-house in the piazza.  the heavy cart-horses slipped
and stamped upon the rough stones, shaking their bells and trappings.
some of the drivers were lying asleep on a pile of sacks.  iris-necked
and pink-footed, the pigeons ran about picking up seeds.

after a little while, he hailed a hansom and drove home.  for a few
moments he loitered upon the doorstep, looking round at the silent
square, with its blank, close-shuttered windows and its staring blinds.
the sky was pure opal now, and the roofs of the houses glistened like
silver against it.  from some chimney opposite a thin wreath of smoke
was rising.  it curled, a violet riband, through the nacre-coloured air.

in the huge gilt venetian lantern, spoil of some doge's barge, that
hung from the ceiling of the great, oak-panelled hall of entrance,
lights were still burning from three flickering jets: thin blue petals
of flame they seemed, rimmed with white fire.  he turned them out and,
having thrown his hat and cape on the table, passed through the library
towards the door of his bedroom, a large octagonal chamber on the
ground floor that, in his new-born feeling for luxury, he had just had
decorated for himself and hung with some curious renaissance tapestries
that had been discovered stored in a disused attic at selby royal.  as
he was turning the handle of the door, his eye fell upon the portrait
basil hallward had painted of him.  he started back as if in surprise.
then he went on into his own room, looking somewhat puzzled.  after he
had taken the button-hole out of his coat, he seemed to hesitate.
finally, he came back, went over to the picture, and examined it.  in
the dim arrested light that struggled through the cream-coloured silk
blinds, the face appeared to him to be a little changed.  the
expression looked different.  one would have said that there was a
touch of cruelty in the mouth.  it was certainly strange.

he turned round and, walking to the window, drew up the blind.  the
bright dawn flooded the room and swept the fantastic shadows into dusky
corners, where they lay shuddering.  but the strange expression that he
had noticed in the face of the portrait seemed to linger there, to be
more intensified even.  the quivering ardent sunlight showed him the
lines of cruelty round the mouth as clearly as if he had been looking
into a mirror after he had done some dreadful thing.

he winced and, taking up from the table an oval glass framed in ivory
cupids, one of lord henry's many presents to him, glanced hurriedly
into its polished depths.  no line like that warped his red lips.  what
did it mean?

he rubbed his eyes, and came close to the picture, and examined it
again.  there were no signs of any change when he looked into the
actual painting, and yet there was no doubt that the whole expression
had altered.  it was not a mere fancy of his own.  the thing was
horribly apparent.

he threw himself into a chair and began to think.  suddenly there
flashed across his mind what he had said in basil hallward's studio the
day the picture had been finished.  yes, he remembered it perfectly.
he had uttered a mad wish that he himself might remain young, and the
portrait grow old; that his own beauty might be untarnished, and the
face on the canvas bear the burden of his passions and his sins; that
the painted image might be seared with the lines of suffering and
thought, and that he might keep all the delicate bloom and loveliness
of his then just conscious boyhood.  surely his wish had not been
fulfilled?  such things were impossible.  it seemed monstrous even to
think of them.  and, yet, there was the picture before him, with the
touch of cruelty in the mouth.

cruelty!  had he been cruel?  it was the girl's fault, not his.  he had
dreamed of her as a great artist, had given his love to her because he
had thought her great.  then she had disappointed him.  she had been
shallow and unworthy.  and, yet, a feeling of infinite regret came over
him, as he thought of her lying at his feet sobbing like a little
child.  he remembered with what callousness he had watched her.  why
had he been made like that?  why had such a soul been given to him?
but he had suffered also.  during the three terrible hours that the
play had lasted, he had lived centuries of pain, aeon upon aeon of
torture.  his life was well worth hers.  she had marred him for a
moment, if he had wounded her for an age.  besides, women were better
suited to bear sorrow than men.  they lived on their emotions.  they
only thought of their emotions.  when they took lovers, it was merely
to have some one with whom they could have scenes.  lord henry had told
him that, and lord henry knew what women were.  why should he trouble
about sibyl vane?  she was nothing to him now.

but the picture?  what was he to say of that?  it held the secret of
his life, and told his story.  it had taught him to love his own
beauty.  would it teach him to loathe his own soul?  would he ever look
at it again?

no; it was merely an illusion wrought on the troubled senses.  the
horrible night that he had passed had left phantoms behind it.
suddenly there had fallen upon his brain that tiny scarlet speck that
makes men mad.  the picture had not changed.  it was folly to think so.

yet it was watching him, with its beautiful marred face and its cruel
smile.  its bright hair gleamed in the early sunlight.  its blue eyes
met his own.  a sense of infinite pity, not for himself, but for the
painted image of himself, came over him.  it had altered already, and
would alter more.  its gold would wither into grey.  its red and white
roses would die.  for every sin that he committed, a stain would fleck
and wreck its fairness.  but he would not sin.  the picture, changed or
unchanged, would be to him the visible emblem of conscience.  he would
resist temptation.  he would not see lord henry any more--would not, at
any rate, listen to those subtle poisonous theories that in basil
hallward's garden had first stirred within him the passion for
impossible things.  he would go back to sibyl vane, make her amends,
marry her, try to love her again.  yes, it was his duty to do so.  she
must have suffered more than he had.  poor child!  he had been selfish
and cruel to her.  the fascination that she had exercised over him
would return.  they would be happy together.  his life with her would
be beautiful and pure.

he got up from his chair and drew a large screen right in front of the
portrait, shuddering as he glanced at it.  "how horrible!" he murmured
to himself, and he walked across to the window and opened it.  when he
stepped out on to the grass, he drew a deep breath.  the fresh morning
air seemed to drive away all his sombre passions.  he thought only of
sibyl.  a faint echo of his love came back to him.  he repeated her
name over and over again.  the birds that were singing in the
dew-drenched garden seemed to be telling the flowers about her.



chapter 8

it was long past noon when he awoke.  his valet had crept several times
on tiptoe into the room to see if he was stirring, and had wondered
what made his young master sleep so late.  finally his bell sounded,
and victor came in softly with a cup of tea, and a pile of letters, on
a small tray of old sevres china, and drew back the olive-satin
curtains, with their shimmering blue lining, that hung in front of the
three tall windows.

"monsieur has well slept this morning," he said, smiling.

"what o'clock is it, victor?" asked dorian gray drowsily.

"one hour and a quarter, monsieur."

how late it was!  he sat up, and having sipped some tea, turned over
his letters.  one of them was from lord henry, and had been brought by
hand that morning.  he hesitated for a moment, and then put it aside.
the others he opened listlessly.  they contained the usual collection
of cards, invitations to dinner, tickets for private views, programmes
of charity concerts, and the like that are showered on fashionable
young men every morning during the season.  there was a rather heavy
bill for a chased silver louis-quinze toilet-set that he had not yet
had the courage to send on to his guardians, who were extremely
old-fashioned people and did not realize that we live in an age when
unnecessary things are our only necessities; and there were several
very courteously worded communications from jermyn street money-lenders
offering to advance any sum of money at a moment's notice and at the
most reasonable rates of interest.

after about ten minutes he got up, and throwing on an elaborate
dressing-gown of silk-embroidered cashmere wool, passed into the
onyx-paved bathroom.  the cool water refreshed him after his long
sleep.  he seemed to have forgotten all that he had gone through.  a
dim sense of having taken part in some strange tragedy came to him once
or twice, but there was the unreality of a dream about it.

as soon as he was dressed, he went into the library and sat down to a
light french breakfast that had been laid out for him on a small round
table close to the open window.  it was an exquisite day.  the warm air
seemed laden with spices.  a bee flew in and buzzed round the
blue-dragon bowl that, filled with sulphur-yellow roses, stood before
him.  he felt perfectly happy.

suddenly his eye fell on the screen that he had placed in front of the
portrait, and he started.

"too cold for monsieur?" asked his valet, putting an omelette on the
table.  "i shut the window?"

dorian shook his head.  "i am not cold," he murmured.

was it all true?  had the portrait really changed?  or had it been
simply his own imagination that had made him see a look of evil where
there had been a look of joy?  surely a painted canvas could not alter?
the thing was absurd.  it would serve as a tale to tell basil some day.
it would make him smile.

and, yet, how vivid was his recollection of the whole thing!  first in
the dim twilight, and then in the bright dawn, he had seen the touch of
cruelty round the warped lips.  he almost dreaded his valet leaving the
room.  he knew that when he was alone he would have to examine the
portrait.  he was afraid of certainty.  when the coffee and cigarettes
had been brought and the man turned to go, he felt a wild desire to
tell him to remain.  as the door was closing behind him, he called him
back.  the man stood waiting for his orders.  dorian looked at him for
a moment.  "i am not at home to any one, victor," he said with a sigh.
the man bowed and retired.

then he rose from the table, lit a cigarette, and flung himself down on
a luxuriously cushioned couch that stood facing the screen.  the screen
was an old one, of gilt spanish leather, stamped and wrought with a
rather florid louis-quatorze pattern.  he scanned it curiously,
wondering if ever before it had concealed the secret of a man's life.

should he move it aside, after all?  why not let it stay there?  what
was the use of knowing? if the thing was true, it was terrible.  if it
was not true, why trouble about it?  but what if, by some fate or
deadlier chance, eyes other than his spied behind and saw the horrible
change?  what should he do if basil hallward came and asked to look at
his own picture?  basil would be sure to do that.  no; the thing had to
be examined, and at once.  anything would be better than this dreadful
state of doubt.

he got up and locked both doors.  at least he would be alone when he
looked upon the mask of his shame.  then he drew the screen aside and
saw himself face to face.  it was perfectly true.  the portrait had
altered.

as he often remembered afterwards, and always with no small wonder, he
found himself at first gazing at the portrait with a feeling of almost
scientific interest.  that such a change should have taken place was
incredible to him.  and yet it was a fact.  was there some subtle
affinity between the chemical atoms that shaped themselves into form
and colour on the canvas and the soul that was within him?  could it be
that what that soul thought, they realized?--that what it dreamed, they
made true?  or was there some other, more terrible reason?  he
shuddered, and felt afraid, and, going back to the couch, lay there,
gazing at the picture in sickened horror.

one thing, however, he felt that it had done for him.  it had made him
conscious how unjust, how cruel, he had been to sibyl vane.  it was not
too late to make reparation for that.  she could still be his wife.
his unreal and selfish love would yield to some higher influence, would
be transformed into some nobler passion, and the portrait that basil
hallward had painted of him would be a guide to him through life, would
be to him what holiness is to some, and conscience to others, and the
fear of god to us all.  there were opiates for remorse, drugs that
could lull the moral sense to sleep.  but here was a visible symbol of
the degradation of sin.  here was an ever-present sign of the ruin men
brought upon their souls.

three o'clock struck, and four, and the half-hour rang its double
chime, but dorian gray did not stir.  he was trying to gather up the
scarlet threads of life and to weave them into a pattern; to find his
way through the sanguine labyrinth of passion through which he was
wandering.  he did not know what to do, or what to think.  finally, he
went over to the table and wrote a passionate letter to the girl he had
loved, imploring her forgiveness and accusing himself of madness.  he
covered page after page with wild words of sorrow and wilder words of
pain.  there is a luxury in self-reproach. when we blame ourselves, we
feel that no one else has a right to blame us.  it is the confession,
not the priest, that gives us absolution.  when dorian had finished the
letter, he felt that he had been forgiven.

suddenly there came a knock to the door, and he heard lord henry's
voice outside.  "my dear boy, i must see you.  let me in at once.  i
can't bear your shutting yourself up like this."

he made no answer at first, but remained quite still.  the knocking
still continued and grew louder.  yes, it was better to let lord henry
in, and to explain to him the new life he was going to lead, to quarrel
with him if it became necessary to quarrel, to part if parting was
inevitable.  he jumped up, drew the screen hastily across the picture,
and unlocked the door.

"i am so sorry for it all, dorian," said lord henry as he entered.
"but you must not think too much about it."

"do you mean about sibyl vane?" asked the lad.

"yes, of course," answered lord henry, sinking into a chair and slowly
pulling off his yellow gloves.  "it is dreadful, from one point of
view, but it was not your fault.  tell me, did you go behind and see
her, after the play was over?"

"yes."

"i felt sure you had.  did you make a scene with her?"

"i was brutal, harry--perfectly brutal.  but it is all right now.  i am
not sorry for anything that has happened.  it has taught me to know
myself better."

"ah, dorian, i am so glad you take it in that way!  i was afraid i
would find you plunged in remorse and tearing that nice curly hair of
yours."

"i have got through all that," said dorian, shaking his head and
smiling.  "i am perfectly happy now.  i know what conscience is, to
begin with.  it is not what you told me it was.  it is the divinest
thing in us.  don't sneer at it, harry, any more--at least not before
me.  i want to be good.  i can't bear the idea of my soul being
hideous."

"a very charming artistic basis for ethics, dorian!  i congratulate you
on it.  but how are you going to begin?"

"by marrying sibyl vane."

"marrying sibyl vane!" cried lord henry, standing up and looking at him
in perplexed amazement.  "but, my dear dorian--"

"yes, harry, i know what you are going to say.  something dreadful
about marriage.  don't say it.  don't ever say things of that kind to
me again.  two days ago i asked sibyl to marry me.  i am not going to
break my word to her.  she is to be my wife."

"your wife!  dorian! ... didn't you get my letter?  i wrote to you this
morning, and sent the note down by my own man."

"your letter?  oh, yes, i remember.  i have not read it yet, harry.  i
was afraid there might be something in it that i wouldn't like.  you
cut life to pieces with your epigrams."

"you know nothing then?"

"what do you mean?"

lord henry walked across the room, and sitting down by dorian gray,
took both his hands in his own and held them tightly.  "dorian," he
said, "my letter--don't be frightened--was to tell you that sibyl vane
is dead."

a cry of pain broke from the lad's lips, and he leaped to his feet,
tearing his hands away from lord henry's grasp.  "dead!  sibyl dead!
it is not true!  it is a horrible lie!  how dare you say it?"

"it is quite true, dorian," said lord henry, gravely.  "it is in all
the morning papers.  i wrote down to you to ask you not to see any one
till i came.  there will have to be an inquest, of course, and you must
not be mixed up in it.  things like that make a man fashionable in
paris.  but in london people are so prejudiced.  here, one should never
make one's _debut_ with a scandal.  one should reserve that to give an
interest to one's old age.  i suppose they don't know your name at the
theatre?  if they don't, it is all right.  did any one see you going
round to her room?  that is an important point."

dorian did not answer for a few moments.  he was dazed with horror.
finally he stammered, in a stifled voice, "harry, did you say an
inquest?  what did you mean by that?  did sibyl--? oh, harry, i can't
bear it!  but be quick.  tell me everything at once."

"i have no doubt it was not an accident, dorian, though it must be put
in that way to the public.  it seems that as she was leaving the
theatre with her mother, about half-past twelve or so, she said she had
forgotten something upstairs.  they waited some time for her, but she
did not come down again.  they ultimately found her lying dead on the
floor of her dressing-room. she had swallowed something by mistake,
some dreadful thing they use at theatres.  i don't know what it was,
but it had either prussic acid or white lead in it.  i should fancy it
was prussic acid, as she seems to have died instantaneously."

"harry, harry, it is terrible!" cried the lad.

"yes; it is very tragic, of course, but you must not get yourself mixed
up in it.  i see by _the standard_ that she was seventeen.  i should have
thought she was almost younger than that.  she looked such a child, and
seemed to know so little about acting.  dorian, you mustn't let this
thing get on your nerves.  you must come and dine with me, and
afterwards we will look in at the opera.  it is a patti night, and
everybody will be there.  you can come to my sister's box.  she has got
some smart women with her."

"so i have murdered sibyl vane," said dorian gray, half to himself,
"murdered her as surely as if i had cut her little throat with a knife.
yet the roses are not less lovely for all that.  the birds sing just as
happily in my garden.  and to-night i am to dine with you, and then go
on to the opera, and sup somewhere, i suppose, afterwards.  how
extraordinarily dramatic life is!  if i had read all this in a book,
harry, i think i would have wept over it.  somehow, now that it has
happened actually, and to me, it seems far too wonderful for tears.
here is the first passionate love-letter i have ever written in my
life.  strange, that my first passionate love-letter should have been
addressed to a dead girl.  can they feel, i wonder, those white silent
people we call the dead?  sibyl!  can she feel, or know, or listen?
oh, harry, how i loved her once!  it seems years ago to me now.  she
was everything to me.  then came that dreadful night--was it really
only last night?--when she played so badly, and my heart almost broke.
she explained it all to me.  it was terribly pathetic.  but i was not
moved a bit.  i thought her shallow.  suddenly something happened that
made me afraid.  i can't tell you what it was, but it was terrible.  i
said i would go back to her.  i felt i had done wrong.  and now she is
dead.  my god!  my god!  harry, what shall i do?  you don't know the
danger i am in, and there is nothing to keep me straight.  she would
have done that for me.  she had no right to kill herself.  it was
selfish of her."

"my dear dorian," answered lord henry, taking a cigarette from his case
and producing a gold-latten matchbox, "the only way a woman can ever
reform a man is by boring him so completely that he loses all possible
interest in life.  if you had married this girl, you would have been
wretched.  of course, you would have treated her kindly.  one can
always be kind to people about whom one cares nothing.  but she would
have soon found out that you were absolutely indifferent to her.  and
when a woman finds that out about her husband, she either becomes
dreadfully dowdy, or wears very smart bonnets that some other woman's
husband has to pay for.  i say nothing about the social mistake, which
would have been abject--which, of course, i would not have allowed--but
i assure you that in any case the whole thing would have been an
absolute failure."

"i suppose it would," muttered the lad, walking up and down the room
and looking horribly pale.  "but i thought it was my duty.  it is not
my fault that this terrible tragedy has prevented my doing what was
right.  i remember your saying once that there is a fatality about good
resolutions--that they are always made too late.  mine certainly were."

"good resolutions are useless attempts to interfere with scientific
laws.  their origin is pure vanity.  their result is absolutely _nil_.
they give us, now and then, some of those luxurious sterile emotions
that have a certain charm for the weak.  that is all that can be said
for them.  they are simply cheques that men draw on a bank where they
have no account."

"harry," cried dorian gray, coming over and sitting down beside him,
"why is it that i cannot feel this tragedy as much as i want to?  i
don't think i am heartless.  do you?"

"you have done too many foolish things during the last fortnight to be
entitled to give yourself that name, dorian," answered lord henry with
his sweet melancholy smile.

the lad frowned.  "i don't like that explanation, harry," he rejoined,
"but i am glad you don't think i am heartless.  i am nothing of the
kind.  i know i am not.  and yet i must admit that this thing that has
happened does not affect me as it should.  it seems to me to be simply
like a wonderful ending to a wonderful play.  it has all the terrible
beauty of a greek tragedy, a tragedy in which i took a great part, but
by which i have not been wounded."

"it is an interesting question," said lord henry, who found an
exquisite pleasure in playing on the lad's unconscious egotism, "an
extremely interesting question.  i fancy that the true explanation is
this:  it often happens that the real tragedies of life occur in such
an inartistic manner that they hurt us by their crude violence, their
absolute incoherence, their absurd want of meaning, their entire lack
of style.  they affect us just as vulgarity affects us.  they give us
an impression of sheer brute force, and we revolt against that.
sometimes, however, a tragedy that possesses artistic elements of
beauty crosses our lives.  if these elements of beauty are real, the
whole thing simply appeals to our sense of dramatic effect.  suddenly
we find that we are no longer the actors, but the spectators of the
play.  or rather we are both.  we watch ourselves, and the mere wonder
of the spectacle enthralls us.  in the present case, what is it that
has really happened?  some one has killed herself for love of you.  i
wish that i had ever had such an experience.  it would have made me in
love with love for the rest of my life.  the people who have adored
me--there have not been very many, but there have been some--have
always insisted on living on, long after i had ceased to care for them,
or they to care for me.  they have become stout and tedious, and when i
meet them, they go in at once for reminiscences.  that awful memory of
woman!  what a fearful thing it is!  and what an utter intellectual
stagnation it reveals!  one should absorb the colour of life, but one
should never remember its details.  details are always vulgar."

"i must sow poppies in my garden," sighed dorian.

"there is no necessity," rejoined his companion.  "life has always
poppies in her hands.  of course, now and then things linger.  i once
wore nothing but violets all through one season, as a form of artistic
mourning for a romance that would not die.  ultimately, however, it did
die.  i forget what killed it.  i think it was her proposing to
sacrifice the whole world for me.  that is always a dreadful moment.
it fills one with the terror of eternity.  well--would you believe
it?--a week ago, at lady hampshire's, i found myself seated at dinner
next the lady in question, and she insisted on going over the whole
thing again, and digging up the past, and raking up the future.  i had
buried my romance in a bed of asphodel.  she dragged it out again and
assured me that i had spoiled her life.  i am bound to state that she
ate an enormous dinner, so i did not feel any anxiety.  but what a lack
of taste she showed!  the one charm of the past is that it is the past.
but women never know when the curtain has fallen.  they always want a
sixth act, and as soon as the interest of the play is entirely over,
they propose to continue it.  if they were allowed their own way, every
comedy would have a tragic ending, and every tragedy would culminate in
a farce.  they are charmingly artificial, but they have no sense of
art.  you are more fortunate than i am.  i assure you, dorian, that not
one of the women i have known would have done for me what sibyl vane
did for you.  ordinary women always console themselves.  some of them
do it by going in for sentimental colours.  never trust a woman who
wears mauve, whatever her age may be, or a woman over thirty-five who
is fond of pink ribbons.  it always means that they have a history.
others find a great consolation in suddenly discovering the good
qualities of their husbands.  they flaunt their conjugal felicity in
one's face, as if it were the most fascinating of sins.  religion
consoles some.  its mysteries have all the charm of a flirtation, a
woman once told me, and i can quite understand it.  besides, nothing
makes one so vain as being told that one is a sinner.  conscience makes
egotists of us all.  yes; there is really no end to the consolations
that women find in modern life.  indeed, i have not mentioned the most
important one."

"what is that, harry?" said the lad listlessly.

"oh, the obvious consolation.  taking some one else's admirer when one
loses one's own.  in good society that always whitewashes a woman.  but
really, dorian, how different sibyl vane must have been from all the
women one meets!  there is something to me quite beautiful about her
death.  i am glad i am living in a century when such wonders happen.
they make one believe in the reality of the things we all play with,
such as romance, passion, and love."

"i was terribly cruel to her.  you forget that."

"i am afraid that women appreciate cruelty, downright cruelty, more
than anything else.  they have wonderfully primitive instincts.  we
have emancipated them, but they remain slaves looking for their
masters, all the same.  they love being dominated.  i am sure you were
splendid.  i have never seen you really and absolutely angry, but i can
fancy how delightful you looked.  and, after all, you said something to
me the day before yesterday that seemed to me at the time to be merely
fanciful, but that i see now was absolutely true, and it holds the key
to everything."

"what was that, harry?"

"you said to me that sibyl vane represented to you all the heroines of
romance--that she was desdemona one night, and ophelia the other; that
if she died as juliet, she came to life as imogen."

"she will never come to life again now," muttered the lad, burying his
face in his hands.

"no, she will never come to life.  she has played her last part.  but
you must think of that lonely death in the tawdry dressing-room simply
as a strange lurid fragment from some jacobean tragedy, as a wonderful
scene from webster, or ford, or cyril tourneur.  the girl never really
lived, and so she has never really died.  to you at least she was
always a dream, a phantom that flitted through shakespeare's plays and
left them lovelier for its presence, a reed through which shakespeare's
music sounded richer and more full of joy.  the moment she touched
actual life, she marred it, and it marred her, and so she passed away.
mourn for ophelia, if you like.  put ashes on your head because
cordelia was strangled.  cry out against heaven because the daughter of
brabantio died.  but don't waste your tears over sibyl vane.  she was
less real than they are."

there was a silence.  the evening darkened in the room.  noiselessly,
and with silver feet, the shadows crept in from the garden.  the
colours faded wearily out of things.

after some time dorian gray looked up.  "you have explained me to
myself, harry," he murmured with something of a sigh of relief.  "i
felt all that you have said, but somehow i was afraid of it, and i
could not express it to myself.  how well you know me!  but we will not
talk again of what has happened.  it has been a marvellous experience.
that is all.  i wonder if life has still in store for me anything as
marvellous."

"life has everything in store for you, dorian.  there is nothing that
you, with your extraordinary good looks, will not be able to do."

"but suppose, harry, i became haggard, and old, and wrinkled?  what
then?"

"ah, then," said lord henry, rising to go, "then, my dear dorian, you
would have to fight for your victories.  as it is, they are brought to
you.  no, you must keep your good looks.  we live in an age that reads
too much to be wise, and that thinks too much to be beautiful.  we
cannot spare you.  and now you had better dress and drive down to the
club.  we are rather late, as it is."

"i think i shall join you at the opera, harry.  i feel too tired to eat
anything.  what is the number of your sister's box?"

"twenty-seven, i believe.  it is on the grand tier.  you will see her
name on the door.  but i am sorry you won't come and dine."

"i don't feel up to it," said dorian listlessly.  "but i am awfully
obliged to you for all that you have said to me.  you are certainly my
best friend.  no one has ever understood me as you have."

"we are only at the beginning of our friendship, dorian," answered lord
henry, shaking him by the hand.  "good-bye. i shall see you before
nine-thirty, i hope.  remember, patti is singing."

as he closed the door behind him, dorian gray touched the bell, and in
a few minutes victor appeared with the lamps and drew the blinds down.
he waited impatiently for him to go.  the man seemed to take an
interminable time over everything.

as soon as he had left, he rushed to the screen and drew it back.  no;
there was no further change in the picture.  it had received the news
of sibyl vane's death before he had known of it himself.  it was
conscious of the events of life as they occurred.  the vicious cruelty
that marred the fine lines of the mouth had, no doubt, appeared at the
very moment that the girl had drunk the poison, whatever it was.  or
was it indifferent to results?  did it merely take cognizance of what
passed within the soul?  he wondered, and hoped that some day he would
see the change taking place before his very eyes, shuddering as he
hoped it.

poor sibyl!  what a romance it had all been!  she had often mimicked
death on the stage.  then death himself had touched her and taken her
with him.  how had she played that dreadful last scene?  had she cursed
him, as she died?  no; she had died for love of him, and love would
always be a sacrament to him now.  she had atoned for everything by the
sacrifice she had made of her life.  he would not think any more of
what she had made him go through, on that horrible night at the
theatre.  when he thought of her, it would be as a wonderful tragic
figure sent on to the world's stage to show the supreme reality of
love.  a wonderful tragic figure?  tears came to his eyes as he
remembered her childlike look, and winsome fanciful ways, and shy
tremulous grace.  he brushed them away hastily and looked again at the
picture.

he felt that the time had really come for making his choice.  or had
his choice already been made?  yes, life had decided that for
him--life, and his own infinite curiosity about life.  eternal youth,
infinite passion, pleasures subtle and secret, wild joys and wilder
sins--he was to have all these things.  the portrait was to bear the
burden of his shame: that was all.

a feeling of pain crept over him as he thought of the desecration that
was in store for the fair face on the canvas.  once, in boyish mockery
of narcissus, he had kissed, or feigned to kiss, those painted lips
that now smiled so cruelly at him.  morning after morning he had sat
before the portrait wondering at its beauty, almost enamoured of it, as
it seemed to him at times.  was it to alter now with every mood to
which he yielded?  was it to become a monstrous and loathsome thing, to
be hidden away in a locked room, to be shut out from the sunlight that
had so often touched to brighter gold the waving wonder of its hair?
the pity of it! the pity of it!

for a moment, he thought of praying that the horrible sympathy that
existed between him and the picture might cease.  it had changed in
answer to a prayer; perhaps in answer to a prayer it might remain
unchanged.  and yet, who, that knew anything about life, would
surrender the chance of remaining always young, however fantastic that
chance might be, or with what fateful consequences it might be fraught?
besides, was it really under his control?  had it indeed been prayer
that had produced the substitution?  might there not be some curious
scientific reason for it all?  if thought could exercise its influence
upon a living organism, might not thought exercise an influence upon
dead and inorganic things?  nay, without thought or conscious desire,
might not things external to ourselves vibrate in unison with our moods
and passions, atom calling to atom in secret love or strange affinity?
but the reason was of no importance.  he would never again tempt by a
prayer any terrible power.  if the picture was to alter, it was to
alter.  that was all.  why inquire too closely into it?

for there would be a real pleasure in watching it.  he would be able to
follow his mind into its secret places.  this portrait would be to him
the most magical of mirrors.  as it had revealed to him his own body,
so it would reveal to him his own soul.  and when winter came upon it,
he would still be standing where spring trembles on the verge of
summer.  when the blood crept from its face, and left behind a pallid
mask of chalk with leaden eyes, he would keep the glamour of boyhood.
not one blossom of his loveliness would ever fade.  not one pulse of
his life would ever weaken.  like the gods of the greeks, he would be
strong, and fleet, and joyous.  what did it matter what happened to the
coloured image on the canvas?  he would be safe.  that was everything.

he drew the screen back into its former place in front of the picture,
smiling as he did so, and passed into his bedroom, where his valet was
already waiting for him.  an hour later he was at the opera, and lord
henry was leaning over his chair.



chapter 9

as he was sitting at breakfast next morning, basil hallward was shown
into the room.

"i am so glad i have found you, dorian," he said gravely.  "i called
last night, and they told me you were at the opera.  of course, i knew
that was impossible.  but i wish you had left word where you had really
gone to.  i passed a dreadful evening, half afraid that one tragedy
might be followed by another.  i think you might have telegraphed for
me when you heard of it first.  i read of it quite by chance in a late
edition of _the globe_ that i picked up at the club.  i came here at once
and was miserable at not finding you.  i can't tell you how
heart-broken i am about the whole thing.  i know what you must suffer.
but where were you?  did you go down and see the girl's mother?  for a
moment i thought of following you there.  they gave the address in the
paper.  somewhere in the euston road, isn't it?  but i was afraid of
intruding upon a sorrow that i could not lighten.  poor woman!  what a
state she must be in!  and her only child, too!  what did she say about
it all?"

"my dear basil, how do i know?" murmured dorian gray, sipping some
pale-yellow wine from a delicate, gold-beaded bubble of venetian glass
and looking dreadfully bored.  "i was at the opera.  you should have
come on there.  i met lady gwendolen, harry's sister, for the first
time.  we were in her box.  she is perfectly charming; and patti sang
divinely.  don't talk about horrid subjects.  if one doesn't talk about
a thing, it has never happened.  it is simply expression, as harry
says, that gives reality to things.  i may mention that she was not the
woman's only child.  there is a son, a charming fellow, i believe.  but
he is not on the stage.  he is a sailor, or something.  and now, tell
me about yourself and what you are painting."

"you went to the opera?" said hallward, speaking very slowly and with a
strained touch of pain in his voice.  "you went to the opera while
sibyl vane was lying dead in some sordid lodging?  you can talk to me
of other women being charming, and of patti singing divinely, before
the girl you loved has even the quiet of a grave to sleep in?  why,
man, there are horrors in store for that little white body of hers!"

"stop, basil!  i won't hear it!" cried dorian, leaping to his feet.
"you must not tell me about things.  what is done is done.  what is
past is past."

"you call yesterday the past?"

"what has the actual lapse of time got to do with it?  it is only
shallow people who require years to get rid of an emotion.  a man who
is master of himself can end a sorrow as easily as he can invent a
pleasure.  i don't want to be at the mercy of my emotions.  i want to
use them, to enjoy them, and to dominate them."

"dorian, this is horrible!  something has changed you completely.  you
look exactly the same wonderful boy who, day after day, used to come
down to my studio to sit for his picture.  but you were simple,
natural, and affectionate then.  you were the most unspoiled creature
in the whole world.  now, i don't know what has come over you.  you
talk as if you had no heart, no pity in you.  it is all harry's
influence.  i see that."

the lad flushed up and, going to the window, looked out for a few
moments on the green, flickering, sun-lashed garden.  "i owe a great
deal to harry, basil," he said at last, "more than i owe to you.  you
only taught me to be vain."

"well, i am punished for that, dorian--or shall be some day."

"i don't know what you mean, basil," he exclaimed, turning round.  "i
don't know what you want.  what do you want?"

"i want the dorian gray i used to paint," said the artist sadly.

"basil," said the lad, going over to him and putting his hand on his
shoulder, "you have come too late.  yesterday, when i heard that sibyl
vane had killed herself--"

"killed herself!  good heavens! is there no doubt about that?" cried
hallward, looking up at him with an expression of horror.

"my dear basil!  surely you don't think it was a vulgar accident?  of
course she killed herself."

the elder man buried his face in his hands.  "how fearful," he
muttered, and a shudder ran through him.

"no," said dorian gray, "there is nothing fearful about it.  it is one
of the great romantic tragedies of the age.  as a rule, people who act
lead the most commonplace lives.  they are good husbands, or faithful
wives, or something tedious.  you know what i mean--middle-class virtue
and all that kind of thing.  how different sibyl was!  she lived her
finest tragedy.  she was always a heroine.  the last night she
played--the night you saw her--she acted badly because she had known
the reality of love.  when she knew its unreality, she died, as juliet
might have died.  she passed again into the sphere of art.  there is
something of the martyr about her.  her death has all the pathetic
uselessness of martyrdom, all its wasted beauty.  but, as i was saying,
you must not think i have not suffered.  if you had come in yesterday
at a particular moment--about half-past five, perhaps, or a quarter to
six--you would have found me in tears.  even harry, who was here, who
brought me the news, in fact, had no idea what i was going through.  i
suffered immensely.  then it passed away.  i cannot repeat an emotion.
no one can, except sentimentalists.  and you are awfully unjust, basil.
you come down here to console me.  that is charming of you.  you find
me consoled, and you are furious.  how like a sympathetic person!  you
remind me of a story harry told me about a certain philanthropist who
spent twenty years of his life in trying to get some grievance
redressed, or some unjust law altered--i forget exactly what it was.
finally he succeeded, and nothing could exceed his disappointment.  he
had absolutely nothing to do, almost died of _ennui_, and became a
confirmed misanthrope.  and besides, my dear old basil, if you really
want to console me, teach me rather to forget what has happened, or to
see it from a proper artistic point of view.  was it not gautier who
used to write about _la consolation des arts_?  i remember picking up a
little vellum-covered book in your studio one day and chancing on that
delightful phrase.  well, i am not like that young man you told me of
when we were down at marlow together, the young man who used to say
that yellow satin could console one for all the miseries of life.  i
love beautiful things that one can touch and handle.  old brocades,
green bronzes, lacquer-work, carved ivories, exquisite surroundings,
luxury, pomp--there is much to be got from all these.  but the artistic
temperament that they create, or at any rate reveal, is still more to
me.  to become the spectator of one's own life, as harry says, is to
escape the suffering of life.  i know you are surprised at my talking
to you like this.  you have not realized how i have developed.  i was a
schoolboy when you knew me.  i am a man now.  i have new passions, new
thoughts, new ideas.  i am different, but you must not like me less.  i
am changed, but you must always be my friend.  of course, i am very
fond of harry.  but i know that you are better than he is.  you are not
stronger--you are too much afraid of life--but you are better.  and how
happy we used to be together!  don't leave me, basil, and don't quarrel
with me.  i am what i am.  there is nothing more to be said."

the painter felt strangely moved.  the lad was infinitely dear to him,
and his personality had been the great turning point in his art.  he
could not bear the idea of reproaching him any more.  after all, his
indifference was probably merely a mood that would pass away.  there
was so much in him that was good, so much in him that was noble.

"well, dorian," he said at length, with a sad smile, "i won't speak to
you again about this horrible thing, after to-day.  i only trust your
name won't be mentioned in connection with it.  the inquest is to take
place this afternoon.  have they summoned you?"

dorian shook his head, and a look of annoyance passed over his face at
the mention of the word "inquest."  there was something so crude and
vulgar about everything of the kind.  "they don't know my name," he
answered.

"but surely she did?"

"only my christian name, and that i am quite sure she never mentioned
to any one.  she told me once that they were all rather curious to
learn who i was, and that she invariably told them my name was prince
charming.  it was pretty of her.  you must do me a drawing of sibyl,
basil.  i should like to have something more of her than the memory of
a few kisses and some broken pathetic words."

"i will try and do something, dorian, if it would please you.  but you
must come and sit to me yourself again.  i can't get on without you."

"i can never sit to you again, basil.  it is impossible!" he exclaimed,
starting back.

the painter stared at him.  "my dear boy, what nonsense!" he cried.
"do you mean to say you don't like what i did of you?  where is it?
why have you pulled the screen in front of it?  let me look at it.  it
is the best thing i have ever done.  do take the screen away, dorian.
it is simply disgraceful of your servant hiding my work like that.  i
felt the room looked different as i came in."

"my servant has nothing to do with it, basil.  you don't imagine i let
him arrange my room for me?  he settles my flowers for me
sometimes--that is all.  no; i did it myself.  the light was too strong
on the portrait."

"too strong!  surely not, my dear fellow?  it is an admirable place for
it.  let me see it."  and hallward walked towards the corner of the
room.

a cry of terror broke from dorian gray's lips, and he rushed between
the painter and the screen.  "basil," he said, looking very pale, "you
must not look at it.  i don't wish you to."

"not look at my own work!  you are not serious.  why shouldn't i look
at it?" exclaimed hallward, laughing.

"if you try to look at it, basil, on my word of honour i will never
speak to you again as long as i live.  i am quite serious.  i don't
offer any explanation, and you are not to ask for any.  but, remember,
if you touch this screen, everything is over between us."

hallward was thunderstruck.  he looked at dorian gray in absolute
amazement.  he had never seen him like this before.  the lad was
actually pallid with rage.  his hands were clenched, and the pupils of
his eyes were like disks of blue fire.  he was trembling all over.

"dorian!"

"don't speak!"

"but what is the matter?  of course i won't look at it if you don't
want me to," he said, rather coldly, turning on his heel and going over
towards the window.  "but, really, it seems rather absurd that i
shouldn't see my own work, especially as i am going to exhibit it in
paris in the autumn.  i shall probably have to give it another coat of
varnish before that, so i must see it some day, and why not to-day?"

"to exhibit it!  you want to exhibit it?" exclaimed dorian gray, a
strange sense of terror creeping over him.  was the world going to be
shown his secret?  were people to gape at the mystery of his life?
that was impossible.  something--he did not know what--had to be done
at once.

"yes; i don't suppose you will object to that.  georges petit is going
to collect all my best pictures for a special exhibition in the rue de
seze, which will open the first week in october.  the portrait will
only be away a month.  i should think you could easily spare it for
that time.  in fact, you are sure to be out of town.  and if you keep
it always behind a screen, you can't care much about it."

dorian gray passed his hand over his forehead.  there were beads of
perspiration there.  he felt that he was on the brink of a horrible
danger.  "you told me a month ago that you would never exhibit it," he
cried.  "why have you changed your mind?  you people who go in for
being consistent have just as many moods as others have.  the only
difference is that your moods are rather meaningless.  you can't have
forgotten that you assured me most solemnly that nothing in the world
would induce you to send it to any exhibition.  you told harry exactly
the same thing." he stopped suddenly, and a gleam of light came into
his eyes.  he remembered that lord henry had said to him once, half
seriously and half in jest, "if you want to have a strange quarter of
an hour, get basil to tell you why he won't exhibit your picture.  he
told me why he wouldn't, and it was a revelation to me."  yes, perhaps
basil, too, had his secret.  he would ask him and try.

"basil," he said, coming over quite close and looking him straight in
the face, "we have each of us a secret.  let me know yours, and i shall
tell you mine.  what was your reason for refusing to exhibit my
picture?"

the painter shuddered in spite of himself.  "dorian, if i told you, you
might like me less than you do, and you would certainly laugh at me.  i
could not bear your doing either of those two things.  if you wish me
never to look at your picture again, i am content.  i have always you
to look at.  if you wish the best work i have ever done to be hidden
from the world, i am satisfied.  your friendship is dearer to me than
any fame or reputation."

"no, basil, you must tell me," insisted dorian gray.  "i think i have a
right to know."  his feeling of terror had passed away, and curiosity
had taken its place.  he was determined to find out basil hallward's
mystery.

"let us sit down, dorian," said the painter, looking troubled.  "let us
sit down.  and just answer me one question.  have you noticed in the
picture something curious?--something that probably at first did not
strike you, but that revealed itself to you suddenly?"

"basil!" cried the lad, clutching the arms of his chair with trembling
hands and gazing at him with wild startled eyes.

"i see you did.  don't speak.  wait till you hear what i have to say.
dorian, from the moment i met you, your personality had the most
extraordinary influence over me.  i was dominated, soul, brain, and
power, by you.  you became to me the visible incarnation of that unseen
ideal whose memory haunts us artists like an exquisite dream.  i
worshipped you.  i grew jealous of every one to whom you spoke.  i
wanted to have you all to myself.  i was only happy when i was with
you.  when you were away from me, you were still present in my art....
of course, i never let you know anything about this.  it would have
been impossible.  you would not have understood it.  i hardly
understood it myself.  i only knew that i had seen perfection face to
face, and that the world had become wonderful to my eyes--too
wonderful, perhaps, for in such mad worships there is peril, the peril
of losing them, no less than the peril of keeping them....  weeks and
weeks went on, and i grew more and more absorbed in you.  then came a
new development.  i had drawn you as paris in dainty armour, and as
adonis with huntsman's cloak and polished boar-spear. crowned with
heavy lotus-blossoms you had sat on the prow of adrian's barge, gazing
across the green turbid nile.  you had leaned over the still pool of
some greek woodland and seen in the water's silent silver the marvel of
your own face.  and it had all been what art should be--unconscious,
ideal, and remote.  one day, a fatal day i sometimes think, i
determined to paint a wonderful portrait of you as you actually are,
not in the costume of dead ages, but in your own dress and in your own
time.  whether it was the realism of the method, or the mere wonder of
your own personality, thus directly presented to me without mist or
veil, i cannot tell.  but i know that as i worked at it, every flake
and film of colour seemed to me to reveal my secret.  i grew afraid
that others would know of my idolatry.  i felt, dorian, that i had told
too much, that i had put too much of myself into it.  then it was that
i resolved never to allow the picture to be exhibited.  you were a
little annoyed; but then you did not realize all that it meant to me.
harry, to whom i talked about it, laughed at me.  but i did not mind
that.  when the picture was finished, and i sat alone with it, i felt
that i was right.... well, after a few days the thing left my studio,
and as soon as i had got rid of the intolerable fascination of its
presence, it seemed to me that i had been foolish in imagining that i
had seen anything in it, more than that you were extremely good-looking
and that i could paint.  even now i cannot help feeling that it is a
mistake to think that the passion one feels in creation is ever really
shown in the work one creates.  art is always more abstract than we
fancy.  form and colour tell us of form and colour--that is all.  it
often seems to me that art conceals the artist far more completely than
it ever reveals him.  and so when i got this offer from paris, i
determined to make your portrait the principal thing in my exhibition.
it never occurred to me that you would refuse.  i see now that you were
right.  the picture cannot be shown.  you must not be angry with me,
dorian, for what i have told you.  as i said to harry, once, you are
made to be worshipped."

dorian gray drew a long breath.  the colour came back to his cheeks,
and a smile played about his lips.  the peril was over.  he was safe
for the time.  yet he could not help feeling infinite pity for the
painter who had just made this strange confession to him, and wondered
if he himself would ever be so dominated by the personality of a
friend.  lord henry had the charm of being very dangerous.  but that
was all.  he was too clever and too cynical to be really fond of.
would there ever be some one who would fill him with a strange
idolatry?  was that one of the things that life had in store?

"it is extraordinary to me, dorian," said hallward, "that you should
have seen this in the portrait.  did you really see it?"

"i saw something in it," he answered, "something that seemed to me very
curious."

"well, you don't mind my looking at the thing now?"

dorian shook his head.  "you must not ask me that, basil.  i could not
possibly let you stand in front of that picture."

"you will some day, surely?"

"never."

"well, perhaps you are right.  and now good-bye, dorian.  you have been
the one person in my life who has really influenced my art.  whatever i
have done that is good, i owe to you.  ah! you don't know what it cost
me to tell you all that i have told you."

"my dear basil," said dorian, "what have you told me?  simply that you
felt that you admired me too much.  that is not even a compliment."

"it was not intended as a compliment.  it was a confession.  now that i
have made it, something seems to have gone out of me.  perhaps one
should never put one's worship into words."

"it was a very disappointing confession."

"why, what did you expect, dorian?  you didn't see anything else in the
picture, did you?  there was nothing else to see?"

"no; there was nothing else to see.  why do you ask?  but you mustn't
talk about worship.  it is foolish.  you and i are friends, basil, and
we must always remain so."

"you have got harry," said the painter sadly.

"oh, harry!" cried the lad, with a ripple of laughter.  "harry spends
his days in saying what is incredible and his evenings in doing what is
improbable.  just the sort of life i would like to lead.  but still i
don't think i would go to harry if i were in trouble.  i would sooner
go to you, basil."

"you will sit to me again?"

"impossible!"

"you spoil my life as an artist by refusing, dorian.  no man comes
across two ideal things.  few come across one."

"i can't explain it to you, basil, but i must never sit to you again.
there is something fatal about a portrait.  it has a life of its own.
i will come and have tea with you.  that will be just as pleasant."

"pleasanter for you, i am afraid," murmured hallward regretfully.  "and
now good-bye. i am sorry you won't let me look at the picture once
again.  but that can't be helped.  i quite understand what you feel
about it."

as he left the room, dorian gray smiled to himself.  poor basil!  how
little he knew of the true reason!  and how strange it was that,
instead of having been forced to reveal his own secret, he had
succeeded, almost by chance, in wresting a secret from his friend!  how
much that strange confession explained to him!  the painter's absurd
fits of jealousy, his wild devotion, his extravagant panegyrics, his
curious reticences--he understood them all now, and he felt sorry.
there seemed to him to be something tragic in a friendship so coloured
by romance.

he sighed and touched the bell.  the portrait must be hidden away at
all costs.  he could not run such a risk of discovery again.  it had
been mad of him to have allowed the thing to remain, even for an hour,
in a room to which any of his friends had access.



chapter 10

when his servant entered, he looked at him steadfastly and wondered if
he had thought of peering behind the screen.  the man was quite
impassive and waited for his orders.  dorian lit a cigarette and walked
over to the glass and glanced into it.  he could see the reflection of
victor's face perfectly.  it was like a placid mask of servility.
there was nothing to be afraid of, there.  yet he thought it best to be
on his guard.

speaking very slowly, he told him to tell the house-keeper that he
wanted to see her, and then to go to the frame-maker and ask him to
send two of his men round at once.  it seemed to him that as the man
left the room his eyes wandered in the direction of the screen.  or was
that merely his own fancy?

after a few moments, in her black silk dress, with old-fashioned thread
mittens on her wrinkled hands, mrs. leaf bustled into the library.  he
asked her for the key of the schoolroom.

"the old schoolroom, mr. dorian?" she exclaimed.  "why, it is full of
dust.  i must get it arranged and put straight before you go into it.
it is not fit for you to see, sir.  it is not, indeed."

"i don't want it put straight, leaf.  i only want the key."

"well, sir, you'll be covered with cobwebs if you go into it.  why, it
hasn't been opened for nearly five years--not since his lordship died."

he winced at the mention of his grandfather.  he had hateful memories
of him.  "that does not matter," he answered.  "i simply want to see
the place--that is all.  give me the key."

"and here is the key, sir," said the old lady, going over the contents
of her bunch with tremulously uncertain hands.  "here is the key.  i'll
have it off the bunch in a moment.  but you don't think of living up
there, sir, and you so comfortable here?"

"no, no," he cried petulantly.  "thank you, leaf.  that will do."

she lingered for a few moments, and was garrulous over some detail of
the household.  he sighed and told her to manage things as she thought
best.  she left the room, wreathed in smiles.

as the door closed, dorian put the key in his pocket and looked round
the room.  his eye fell on a large, purple satin coverlet heavily
embroidered with gold, a splendid piece of late seventeenth-century
venetian work that his grandfather had found in a convent near bologna.
yes, that would serve to wrap the dreadful thing in.  it had perhaps
served often as a pall for the dead.  now it was to hide something that
had a corruption of its own, worse than the corruption of death
itself--something that would breed horrors and yet would never die.
what the worm was to the corpse, his sins would be to the painted image
on the canvas.  they would mar its beauty and eat away its grace.  they
would defile it and make it shameful.  and yet the thing would still
live on.  it would be always alive.

he shuddered, and for a moment he regretted that he had not told basil
the true reason why he had wished to hide the picture away.  basil
would have helped him to resist lord henry's influence, and the still
more poisonous influences that came from his own temperament.  the love
that he bore him--for it was really love--had nothing in it that was
not noble and intellectual.  it was not that mere physical admiration
of beauty that is born of the senses and that dies when the senses
tire.  it was such love as michelangelo had known, and montaigne, and
winckelmann, and shakespeare himself.  yes, basil could have saved him.
but it was too late now.  the past could always be annihilated.
regret, denial, or forgetfulness could do that.  but the future was
inevitable.  there were passions in him that would find their terrible
outlet, dreams that would make the shadow of their evil real.

he took up from the couch the great purple-and-gold texture that
covered it, and, holding it in his hands, passed behind the screen.
was the face on the canvas viler than before?  it seemed to him that it
was unchanged, and yet his loathing of it was intensified.  gold hair,
blue eyes, and rose-red lips--they all were there.  it was simply the
expression that had altered.  that was horrible in its cruelty.
compared to what he saw in it of censure or rebuke, how shallow basil's
reproaches about sibyl vane had been!--how shallow, and of what little
account!  his own soul was looking out at him from the canvas and
calling him to judgement.  a look of pain came across him, and he flung
the rich pall over the picture.  as he did so, a knock came to the
door.  he passed out as his servant entered.

"the persons are here, monsieur."

he felt that the man must be got rid of at once.  he must not be
allowed to know where the picture was being taken to.  there was
something sly about him, and he had thoughtful, treacherous eyes.
sitting down at the writing-table he scribbled a note to lord henry,
asking him to send him round something to read and reminding him that
they were to meet at eight-fifteen that evening.

"wait for an answer," he said, handing it to him, "and show the men in
here."

in two or three minutes there was another knock, and mr. hubbard
himself, the celebrated frame-maker of south audley street, came in
with a somewhat rough-looking young assistant.  mr. hubbard was a
florid, red-whiskered little man, whose admiration for art was
considerably tempered by the inveterate impecuniosity of most of the
artists who dealt with him.  as a rule, he never left his shop.  he
waited for people to come to him.  but he always made an exception in
favour of dorian gray.  there was something about dorian that charmed
everybody.  it was a pleasure even to see him.

"what can i do for you, mr. gray?" he said, rubbing his fat freckled
hands.  "i thought i would do myself the honour of coming round in
person.  i have just got a beauty of a frame, sir.  picked it up at a
sale.  old florentine.  came from fonthill, i believe.  admirably
suited for a religious subject, mr. gray."

"i am so sorry you have given yourself the trouble of coming round, mr.
hubbard.  i shall certainly drop in and look at the frame--though i
don't go in much at present for religious art--but to-day i only want a
picture carried to the top of the house for me.  it is rather heavy, so
i thought i would ask you to lend me a couple of your men."

"no trouble at all, mr. gray.  i am delighted to be of any service to
you.  which is the work of art, sir?"

"this," replied dorian, moving the screen back.  "can you move it,
covering and all, just as it is?  i don't want it to get scratched
going upstairs."

"there will be no difficulty, sir," said the genial frame-maker,
beginning, with the aid of his assistant, to unhook the picture from
the long brass chains by which it was suspended.  "and, now, where
shall we carry it to, mr. gray?"

"i will show you the way, mr. hubbard, if you will kindly follow me.
or perhaps you had better go in front.  i am afraid it is right at the
top of the house.  we will go up by the front staircase, as it is
wider."

he held the door open for them, and they passed out into the hall and
began the ascent.  the elaborate character of the frame had made the
picture extremely bulky, and now and then, in spite of the obsequious
protests of mr. hubbard, who had the true tradesman's spirited dislike
of seeing a gentleman doing anything useful, dorian put his hand to it
so as to help them.

"something of a load to carry, sir," gasped the little man when they
reached the top landing.  and he wiped his shiny forehead.

"i am afraid it is rather heavy," murmured dorian as he unlocked the
door that opened into the room that was to keep for him the curious
secret of his life and hide his soul from the eyes of men.

he had not entered the place for more than four years--not, indeed,
since he had used it first as a play-room when he was a child, and then
as a study when he grew somewhat older.  it was a large,
well-proportioned room, which had been specially built by the last lord
kelso for the use of the little grandson whom, for his strange likeness
to his mother, and also for other reasons, he had always hated and
desired to keep at a distance.  it appeared to dorian to have but
little changed.  there was the huge italian _cassone_, with its
fantastically painted panels and its tarnished gilt mouldings, in which
he had so often hidden himself as a boy.  there the satinwood book-case
filled with his dog-eared schoolbooks.  on the wall behind it was
hanging the same ragged flemish tapestry where a faded king and queen
were playing chess in a garden, while a company of hawkers rode by,
carrying hooded birds on their gauntleted wrists.  how well he
remembered it all!  every moment of his lonely childhood came back to
him as he looked round.  he recalled the stainless purity of his boyish
life, and it seemed horrible to him that it was here the fatal portrait
was to be hidden away.  how little he had thought, in those dead days,
of all that was in store for him!

but there was no other place in the house so secure from prying eyes as
this.  he had the key, and no one else could enter it.  beneath its
purple pall, the face painted on the canvas could grow bestial, sodden,
and unclean.  what did it matter?  no one could see it.  he himself
would not see it.  why should he watch the hideous corruption of his
soul?  he kept his youth--that was enough.  and, besides, might not
his nature grow finer, after all?  there was no reason that the future
should be so full of shame.  some love might come across his life, and
purify him, and shield him from those sins that seemed to be already
stirring in spirit and in flesh--those curious unpictured sins whose
very mystery lent them their subtlety and their charm.  perhaps, some
day, the cruel look would have passed away from the scarlet sensitive
mouth, and he might show to the world basil hallward's masterpiece.

no; that was impossible.  hour by hour, and week by week, the thing
upon the canvas was growing old.  it might escape the hideousness of
sin, but the hideousness of age was in store for it.  the cheeks would
become hollow or flaccid.  yellow crow's feet would creep round the
fading eyes and make them horrible.  the hair would lose its
brightness, the mouth would gape or droop, would be foolish or gross,
as the mouths of old men are.  there would be the wrinkled throat, the
cold, blue-veined hands, the twisted body, that he remembered in the
grandfather who had been so stern to him in his boyhood.  the picture
had to be concealed.  there was no help for it.

"bring it in, mr. hubbard, please," he said, wearily, turning round.
"i am sorry i kept you so long.  i was thinking of something else."

"always glad to have a rest, mr. gray," answered the frame-maker, who
was still gasping for breath.  "where shall we put it, sir?"

"oh, anywhere.  here:  this will do.  i don't want to have it hung up.
just lean it against the wall.  thanks."

"might one look at the work of art, sir?"

dorian started.  "it would not interest you, mr. hubbard," he said,
keeping his eye on the man.  he felt ready to leap upon him and fling
him to the ground if he dared to lift the gorgeous hanging that
concealed the secret of his life.  "i shan't trouble you any more now.
i am much obliged for your kindness in coming round."

"not at all, not at all, mr. gray.  ever ready to do anything for you,
sir." and mr. hubbard tramped downstairs, followed by the assistant,
who glanced back at dorian with a look of shy wonder in his rough
uncomely face.  he had never seen any one so marvellous.

when the sound of their footsteps had died away, dorian locked the door
and put the key in his pocket.  he felt safe now.  no one would ever
look upon the horrible thing.  no eye but his would ever see his shame.

on reaching the library, he found that it was just after five o'clock
and that the tea had been already brought up.  on a little table of
dark perfumed wood thickly incrusted with nacre, a present from lady
radley, his guardian's wife, a pretty professional invalid who had
spent the preceding winter in cairo, was lying a note from lord henry,
and beside it was a book bound in yellow paper, the cover slightly torn
and the edges soiled.  a copy of the third edition of _the st. james's
gazette_ had been placed on the tea-tray. it was evident that victor had
returned.  he wondered if he had met the men in the hall as they were
leaving the house and had wormed out of them what they had been doing.
he would be sure to miss the picture--had no doubt missed it already,
while he had been laying the tea-things. the screen had not been set
back, and a blank space was visible on the wall.  perhaps some night he
might find him creeping upstairs and trying to force the door of the
room.  it was a horrible thing to have a spy in one's house.  he had
heard of rich men who had been blackmailed all their lives by some
servant who had read a letter, or overheard a conversation, or picked
up a card with an address, or found beneath a pillow a withered flower
or a shred of crumpled lace.

he sighed, and having poured himself out some tea, opened lord henry's
note.  it was simply to say that he sent him round the evening paper,
and a book that might interest him, and that he would be at the club at
eight-fifteen. he opened _the st. james's_ languidly, and looked through
it.  a red pencil-mark on the fifth page caught his eye.  it drew
attention to the following paragraph:


inquest on an actress.--an inquest was held this morning at the bell
tavern, hoxton road, by mr. danby, the district coroner, on the body of
sibyl vane, a young actress recently engaged at the royal theatre,
holborn.  a verdict of death by misadventure was returned.
considerable sympathy was expressed for the mother of the deceased, who
was greatly affected during the giving of her own evidence, and that of
dr. birrell, who had made the post-mortem examination of the deceased.


he frowned, and tearing the paper in two, went across the room and
flung the pieces away.  how ugly it all was!  and how horribly real
ugliness made things!  he felt a little annoyed with lord henry for
having sent him the report.  and it was certainly stupid of him to have
marked it with red pencil.  victor might have read it.  the man knew
more than enough english for that.

perhaps he had read it and had begun to suspect something.  and, yet,
what did it matter?  what had dorian gray to do with sibyl vane's
death?  there was nothing to fear.  dorian gray had not killed her.

his eye fell on the yellow book that lord henry had sent him.  what was
it, he wondered.  he went towards the little, pearl-coloured octagonal
stand that had always looked to him like the work of some strange
egyptian bees that wrought in silver, and taking up the volume, flung
himself into an arm-chair and began to turn over the leaves.  after a
few minutes he became absorbed.  it was the strangest book that he had
ever read.  it seemed to him that in exquisite raiment, and to the
delicate sound of flutes, the sins of the world were passing in dumb
show before him.  things that he had dimly dreamed of were suddenly
made real to him.  things of which he had never dreamed were gradually
revealed.

it was a novel without a plot and with only one character, being,
indeed, simply a psychological study of a certain young parisian who
spent his life trying to realize in the nineteenth century all the
passions and modes of thought that belonged to every century except his
own, and to sum up, as it were, in himself the various moods through
which the world-spirit had ever passed, loving for their mere
artificiality those renunciations that men have unwisely called virtue,
as much as those natural rebellions that wise men still call sin.  the
style in which it was written was that curious jewelled style, vivid
and obscure at once, full of _argot_ and of archaisms, of technical
expressions and of elaborate paraphrases, that characterizes the work
of some of the finest artists of the french school of _symbolistes_.
there were in it metaphors as monstrous as orchids and as subtle in
colour.  the life of the senses was described in the terms of mystical
philosophy.  one hardly knew at times whether one was reading the
spiritual ecstasies of some mediaeval saint or the morbid confessions
of a modern sinner.  it was a poisonous book.  the heavy odour of
incense seemed to cling about its pages and to trouble the brain.  the
mere cadence of the sentences, the subtle monotony of their music, so
full as it was of complex refrains and movements elaborately repeated,
produced in the mind of the lad, as he passed from chapter to chapter,
a form of reverie, a malady of dreaming, that made him unconscious of
the falling day and creeping shadows.

cloudless, and pierced by one solitary star, a copper-green sky gleamed
through the windows.  he read on by its wan light till he could read no
more.  then, after his valet had reminded him several times of the
lateness of the hour, he got up, and going into the next room, placed
the book on the little florentine table that always stood at his
bedside and began to dress for dinner.

it was almost nine o'clock before he reached the club, where he found
lord henry sitting alone, in the morning-room, looking very much bored.

"i am so sorry, harry," he cried, "but really it is entirely your
fault.  that book you sent me so fascinated me that i forgot how the
time was going."

"yes, i thought you would like it," replied his host, rising from his
chair.

"i didn't say i liked it, harry.  i said it fascinated me.  there is a
great difference."

"ah, you have discovered that?" murmured lord henry.  and they passed
into the dining-room.



chapter 11

for years, dorian gray could not free himself from the influence of
this book.  or perhaps it would be more accurate to say that he never
sought to free himself from it.  he procured from paris no less than
nine large-paper copies of the first edition, and had them bound in
different colours, so that they might suit his various moods and the
changing fancies of a nature over which he seemed, at times, to have
almost entirely lost control.  the hero, the wonderful young parisian
in whom the romantic and the scientific temperaments were so strangely
blended, became to him a kind of prefiguring type of himself.  and,
indeed, the whole book seemed to him to contain the story of his own
life, written before he had lived it.

in one point he was more fortunate than the novel's fantastic hero.  he
never knew--never, indeed, had any cause to know--that somewhat
grotesque dread of mirrors, and polished metal surfaces, and still
water which came upon the young parisian so early in his life, and was
occasioned by the sudden decay of a beau that had once, apparently,
been so remarkable.  it was with an almost cruel joy--and perhaps in
nearly every joy, as certainly in every pleasure, cruelty has its
place--that he used to read the latter part of the book, with its
really tragic, if somewhat overemphasized, account of the sorrow and
despair of one who had himself lost what in others, and the world, he
had most dearly valued.

for the wonderful beauty that had so fascinated basil hallward, and
many others besides him, seemed never to leave him.  even those who had
heard the most evil things against him--and from time to time strange
rumours about his mode of life crept through london and became the
chatter of the clubs--could not believe anything to his dishonour when
they saw him.  he had always the look of one who had kept himself
unspotted from the world.  men who talked grossly became silent when
dorian gray entered the room.  there was something in the purity of his
face that rebuked them.  his mere presence seemed to recall to them the
memory of the innocence that they had tarnished.  they wondered how one
so charming and graceful as he was could have escaped the stain of an
age that was at once sordid and sensual.

often, on returning home from one of those mysterious and prolonged
absences that gave rise to such strange conjecture among those who were
his friends, or thought that they were so, he himself would creep
upstairs to the locked room, open the door with the key that never left
him now, and stand, with a mirror, in front of the portrait that basil
hallward had painted of him, looking now at the evil and aging face on
the canvas, and now at the fair young face that laughed back at him
from the polished glass.  the very sharpness of the contrast used to
quicken his sense of pleasure.  he grew more and more enamoured of his
own beauty, more and more interested in the corruption of his own soul.
he would examine with minute care, and sometimes with a monstrous and
terrible delight, the hideous lines that seared the wrinkling forehead
or crawled around the heavy sensual mouth, wondering sometimes which
were the more horrible, the signs of sin or the signs of age.  he would
place his white hands beside the coarse bloated hands of the picture,
and smile.  he mocked the misshapen body and the failing limbs.

there were moments, indeed, at night, when, lying sleepless in his own
delicately scented chamber, or in the sordid room of the little
ill-famed tavern near the docks which, under an assumed name and in
disguise, it was his habit to frequent, he would think of the ruin he
had brought upon his soul with a pity that was all the more poignant
because it was purely selfish.  but moments such as these were rare.
that curiosity about life which lord henry had first stirred in him, as
they sat together in the garden of their friend, seemed to increase
with gratification.  the more he knew, the more he desired to know.  he
had mad hungers that grew more ravenous as he fed them.

yet he was not really reckless, at any rate in his relations to
society.  once or twice every month during the winter, and on each
wednesday evening while the season lasted, he would throw open to the
world his beautiful house and have the most celebrated musicians of the
day to charm his guests with the wonders of their art.  his little
dinners, in the settling of which lord henry always assisted him, were
noted as much for the careful selection and placing of those invited,
as for the exquisite taste shown in the decoration of the table, with
its subtle symphonic arrangements of exotic flowers, and embroidered
cloths, and antique plate of gold and silver.  indeed, there were many,
especially among the very young men, who saw, or fancied that they saw,
in dorian gray the true realization of a type of which they had often
dreamed in eton or oxford days, a type that was to combine something of
the real culture of the scholar with all the grace and distinction and
perfect manner of a citizen of the world.  to them he seemed to be of
the company of those whom dante describes as having sought to "make
themselves perfect by the worship of beauty."  like gautier, he was one
for whom "the visible world existed."

and, certainly, to him life itself was the first, the greatest, of the
arts, and for it all the other arts seemed to be but a preparation.
fashion, by which what is really fantastic becomes for a moment
universal, and dandyism, which, in its own way, is an attempt to assert
the absolute modernity of beauty, had, of course, their fascination for
him.  his mode of dressing, and the particular styles that from time to
time he affected, had their marked influence on the young exquisites of
the mayfair balls and pall mall club windows, who copied him in
everything that he did, and tried to reproduce the accidental charm of
his graceful, though to him only half-serious, fopperies.

for, while he was but too ready to accept the position that was almost
immediately offered to him on his coming of age, and found, indeed, a
subtle pleasure in the thought that he might really become to the
london of his own day what to imperial neronian rome the author of the
satyricon once had been, yet in his inmost heart he desired to be
something more than a mere _arbiter elegantiarum_, to be consulted on the
wearing of a jewel, or the knotting of a necktie, or the conduct of a
cane.  he sought to elaborate some new scheme of life that would have
its reasoned philosophy and its ordered principles, and find in the
spiritualizing of the senses its highest realization.

the worship of the senses has often, and with much justice, been
decried, men feeling a natural instinct of terror about passions and
sensations that seem stronger than themselves, and that they are
conscious of sharing with the less highly organized forms of existence.
but it appeared to dorian gray that the true nature of the senses had
never been understood, and that they had remained savage and animal
merely because the world had sought to starve them into submission or
to kill them by pain, instead of aiming at making them elements of a
new spirituality, of which a fine instinct for beauty was to be the
dominant characteristic.  as he looked back upon man moving through
history, he was haunted by a feeling of loss.  so much had been
surrendered! and to such little purpose!  there had been mad wilful
rejections, monstrous forms of self-torture and self-denial, whose
origin was fear and whose result was a degradation infinitely more
terrible than that fancied degradation from which, in their ignorance,
they had sought to escape; nature, in her wonderful irony, driving out
the anchorite to feed with the wild animals of the desert and giving to
the hermit the beasts of the field as his companions.

yes:  there was to be, as lord henry had prophesied, a new hedonism
that was to recreate life and to save it from that harsh uncomely
puritanism that is having, in our own day, its curious revival.  it was
to have its service of the intellect, certainly, yet it was never to
accept any theory or system that would involve the sacrifice of any
mode of passionate experience.  its aim, indeed, was to be experience
itself, and not the fruits of experience, sweet or bitter as they might
be.  of the asceticism that deadens the senses, as of the vulgar
profligacy that dulls them, it was to know nothing.  but it was to
teach man to concentrate himself upon the moments of a life that is
itself but a moment.

there are few of us who have not sometimes wakened before dawn, either
after one of those dreamless nights that make us almost enamoured of
death, or one of those nights of horror and misshapen joy, when through
the chambers of the brain sweep phantoms more terrible than reality
itself, and instinct with that vivid life that lurks in all grotesques,
and that lends to gothic art its enduring vitality, this art being, one
might fancy, especially the art of those whose minds have been troubled
with the malady of reverie.  gradually white fingers creep through the
curtains, and they appear to tremble.  in black fantastic shapes, dumb
shadows crawl into the corners of the room and crouch there.  outside,
there is the stirring of birds among the leaves, or the sound of men
going forth to their work, or the sigh and sob of the wind coming down
from the hills and wandering round the silent house, as though it
feared to wake the sleepers and yet must needs call forth sleep from
her purple cave.  veil after veil of thin dusky gauze is lifted, and by
degrees the forms and colours of things are restored to them, and we
watch the dawn remaking the world in its antique pattern.  the wan
mirrors get back their mimic life.  the flameless tapers stand where we
had left them, and beside them lies the half-cut book that we had been
studying, or the wired flower that we had worn at the ball, or the
letter that we had been afraid to read, or that we had read too often.
nothing seems to us changed.  out of the unreal shadows of the night
comes back the real life that we had known.  we have to resume it where
we had left off, and there steals over us a terrible sense of the
necessity for the continuance of energy in the same wearisome round of
stereotyped habits, or a wild longing, it may be, that our eyelids
might open some morning upon a world that had been refashioned anew in
the darkness for our pleasure, a world in which things would have fresh
shapes and colours, and be changed, or have other secrets, a world in
which the past would have little or no place, or survive, at any rate,
in no conscious form of obligation or regret, the remembrance even of
joy having its bitterness and the memories of pleasure their pain.

it was the creation of such worlds as these that seemed to dorian gray
to be the true object, or amongst the true objects, of life; and in his
search for sensations that would be at once new and delightful, and
possess that element of strangeness that is so essential to romance, he
would often adopt certain modes of thought that he knew to be really
alien to his nature, abandon himself to their subtle influences, and
then, having, as it were, caught their colour and satisfied his
intellectual curiosity, leave them with that curious indifference that
is not incompatible with a real ardour of temperament, and that,
indeed, according to certain modern psychologists, is often a condition
of it.

it was rumoured of him once that he was about to join the roman
catholic communion, and certainly the roman ritual had always a great
attraction for him.  the daily sacrifice, more awful really than all
the sacrifices of the antique world, stirred him as much by its superb
rejection of the evidence of the senses as by the primitive simplicity
of its elements and the eternal pathos of the human tragedy that it
sought to symbolize.  he loved to kneel down on the cold marble
pavement and watch the priest, in his stiff flowered dalmatic, slowly
and with white hands moving aside the veil of the tabernacle, or
raising aloft the jewelled, lantern-shaped monstrance with that pallid
wafer that at times, one would fain think, is indeed the "_panis
caelestis_," the bread of angels, or, robed in the garments of the
passion of christ, breaking the host into the chalice and smiting his
breast for his sins.  the fuming censers that the grave boys, in their
lace and scarlet, tossed into the air like great gilt flowers had their
subtle fascination for him.  as he passed out, he used to look with
wonder at the black confessionals and long to sit in the dim shadow of
one of them and listen to men and women whispering through the worn
grating the true story of their lives.

but he never fell into the error of arresting his intellectual
development by any formal acceptance of creed or system, or of
mistaking, for a house in which to live, an inn that is but suitable
for the sojourn of a night, or for a few hours of a night in which
there are no stars and the moon is in travail.  mysticism, with its
marvellous power of making common things strange to us, and the subtle
antinomianism that always seems to accompany it, moved him for a
season; and for a season he inclined to the materialistic doctrines of
the _darwinismus_ movement in germany, and found a curious pleasure in
tracing the thoughts and passions of men to some pearly cell in the
brain, or some white nerve in the body, delighting in the conception of
the absolute dependence of the spirit on certain physical conditions,
morbid or healthy, normal or diseased.  yet, as has been said of him
before, no theory of life seemed to him to be of any importance
compared with life itself.  he felt keenly conscious of how barren all
intellectual speculation is when separated from action and experiment.
he knew that the senses, no less than the soul, have their spiritual
mysteries to reveal.

and so he would now study perfumes and the secrets of their
manufacture, distilling heavily scented oils and burning odorous gums
from the east.  he saw that there was no mood of the mind that had not
its counterpart in the sensuous life, and set himself to discover their
true relations, wondering what there was in frankincense that made one
mystical, and in ambergris that stirred one's passions, and in violets
that woke the memory of dead romances, and in musk that troubled the
brain, and in champak that stained the imagination; and seeking often
to elaborate a real psychology of perfumes, and to estimate the several
influences of sweet-smelling roots and scented, pollen-laden flowers;
of aromatic balms and of dark and fragrant woods; of spikenard, that
sickens; of hovenia, that makes men mad; and of aloes, that are said to
be able to expel melancholy from the soul.

at another time he devoted himself entirely to music, and in a long
latticed room, with a vermilion-and-gold ceiling and walls of
olive-green lacquer, he used to give curious concerts in which mad
gipsies tore wild music from little zithers, or grave, yellow-shawled
tunisians plucked at the strained strings of monstrous lutes, while
grinning negroes beat monotonously upon copper drums and, crouching
upon scarlet mats, slim turbaned indians blew through long pipes of
reed or brass and charmed--or feigned to charm--great hooded snakes and
horrible horned adders.  the harsh intervals and shrill discords of
barbaric music stirred him at times when schubert's grace, and chopin's
beautiful sorrows, and the mighty harmonies of beethoven himself, fell
unheeded on his ear.  he collected together from all parts of the world
the strangest instruments that could be found, either in the tombs of
dead nations or among the few savage tribes that have survived contact
with western civilizations, and loved to touch and try them.  he had
the mysterious _juruparis_ of the rio negro indians, that women are not
allowed to look at and that even youths may not see till they have been
subjected to fasting and scourging, and the earthen jars of the
peruvians that have the shrill cries of birds, and flutes of human
bones such as alfonso de ovalle heard in chile, and the sonorous green
jaspers that are found near cuzco and give forth a note of singular
sweetness.  he had painted gourds filled with pebbles that rattled when
they were shaken; the long _clarin_ of the mexicans, into which the
performer does not blow, but through which he inhales the air; the
harsh _ture_ of the amazon tribes, that is sounded by the sentinels who
sit all day long in high trees, and can be heard, it is said, at a
distance of three leagues; the _teponaztli_, that has two vibrating
tongues of wood and is beaten with sticks that are smeared with an
elastic gum obtained from the milky juice of plants; the _yotl_-bells of
the aztecs, that are hung in clusters like grapes; and a huge
cylindrical drum, covered with the skins of great serpents, like the
one that bernal diaz saw when he went with cortes into the mexican
temple, and of whose doleful sound he has left us so vivid a
description.  the fantastic character of these instruments fascinated
him, and he felt a curious delight in the thought that art, like
nature, has her monsters, things of bestial shape and with hideous
voices.  yet, after some time, he wearied of them, and would sit in his
box at the opera, either alone or with lord henry, listening in rapt
pleasure to "tannhauser" and seeing in the prelude to that great work
of art a presentation of the tragedy of his own soul.

on one occasion he took up the study of jewels, and appeared at a
costume ball as anne de joyeuse, admiral of france, in a dress covered
with five hundred and sixty pearls.  this taste enthralled him for
years, and, indeed, may be said never to have left him.  he would often
spend a whole day settling and resettling in their cases the various
stones that he had collected, such as the olive-green chrysoberyl that
turns red by lamplight, the cymophane with its wirelike line of silver,
the pistachio-coloured peridot, rose-pink and wine-yellow topazes,
carbuncles of fiery scarlet with tremulous, four-rayed stars, flame-red
cinnamon-stones, orange and violet spinels, and amethysts with their
alternate layers of ruby and sapphire.  he loved the red gold of the
sunstone, and the moonstone's pearly whiteness, and the broken rainbow
of the milky opal.  he procured from amsterdam three emeralds of
extraordinary size and richness of colour, and had a turquoise _de la
vieille roche_ that was the envy of all the connoisseurs.

he discovered wonderful stories, also, about jewels.  in alphonso's
clericalis disciplina a serpent was mentioned with eyes of real
jacinth, and in the romantic history of alexander, the conqueror of
emathia was said to have found in the vale of jordan snakes "with
collars of real emeralds growing on their backs." there was a gem in
the brain of the dragon, philostratus told us, and "by the exhibition
of golden letters and a scarlet robe" the monster could be thrown into
a magical sleep and slain.  according to the great alchemist, pierre de
boniface, the diamond rendered a man invisible, and the agate of india
made him eloquent.  the cornelian appeased anger, and the hyacinth
provoked sleep, and the amethyst drove away the fumes of wine.  the
garnet cast out demons, and the hydropicus deprived the moon of her
colour.  the selenite waxed and waned with the moon, and the meloceus,
that discovers thieves, could be affected only by the blood of kids.
leonardus camillus had seen a white stone taken from the brain of a
newly killed toad, that was a certain antidote against poison.  the
bezoar, that was found in the heart of the arabian deer, was a charm
that could cure the plague.  in the nests of arabian birds was the
aspilates, that, according to democritus, kept the wearer from any
danger by fire.

the king of ceilan rode through his city with a large ruby in his hand,
as the ceremony of his coronation.  the gates of the palace of john the
priest were "made of sardius, with the horn of the horned snake
inwrought, so that no man might bring poison within." over the gable
were "two golden apples, in which were two carbuncles," so that the
gold might shine by day and the carbuncles by night.  in lodge's
strange romance 'a margarite of america', it was stated that in the
chamber of the queen one could behold "all the chaste ladies of the
world, inchased out of silver, looking through fair mirrours of
chrysolites, carbuncles, sapphires, and greene emeraults." marco polo
had seen the inhabitants of zipangu place rose-coloured pearls in the
mouths of the dead.  a sea-monster had been enamoured of the pearl that
the diver brought to king perozes, and had slain the thief, and mourned
for seven moons over its loss.  when the huns lured the king into the
great pit, he flung it away--procopius tells the story--nor was it ever
found again, though the emperor anastasius offered five hundred-weight
of gold pieces for it.  the king of malabar had shown to a certain
venetian a rosary of three hundred and four pearls, one for every god
that he worshipped.

when the duke de valentinois, son of alexander vi, visited louis xii of
france, his horse was loaded with gold leaves, according to brantome,
and his cap had double rows of rubies that threw out a great light.
charles of england had ridden in stirrups hung with four hundred and
twenty-one diamonds.  richard ii had a coat, valued at thirty thousand
marks, which was covered with balas rubies.  hall described henry viii,
on his way to the tower previous to his coronation, as wearing "a
jacket of raised gold, the placard embroidered with diamonds and other
rich stones, and a great bauderike about his neck of large balasses."
the favourites of james i wore ear-rings of emeralds set in gold
filigrane.  edward ii gave to piers gaveston a suit of red-gold armour
studded with jacinths, a collar of gold roses set with
turquoise-stones, and a skull-cap _parseme_ with pearls.  henry ii wore
jewelled gloves reaching to the elbow, and had a hawk-glove sewn with
twelve rubies and fifty-two great orients.  the ducal hat of charles
the rash, the last duke of burgundy of his race, was hung with
pear-shaped pearls and studded with sapphires.

how exquisite life had once been!  how gorgeous in its pomp and
decoration!  even to read of the luxury of the dead was wonderful.

then he turned his attention to embroideries and to the tapestries that
performed the office of frescoes in the chill rooms of the northern
nations of europe.  as he investigated the subject--and he always had
an extraordinary faculty of becoming absolutely absorbed for the moment
in whatever he took up--he was almost saddened by the reflection of the
ruin that time brought on beautiful and wonderful things.  he, at any
rate, had escaped that.  summer followed summer, and the yellow
jonquils bloomed and died many times, and nights of horror repeated the
story of their shame, but he was unchanged.  no winter marred his face
or stained his flowerlike bloom.  how different it was with material
things!  where had they passed to?  where was the great crocus-coloured
robe, on which the gods fought against the giants, that had been worked
by brown girls for the pleasure of athena?  where the huge velarium
that nero had stretched across the colosseum at rome, that titan sail
of purple on which was represented the starry sky, and apollo driving a
chariot drawn by white, gilt-reined steeds?  he longed to see the
curious table-napkins wrought for the priest of the sun, on which were
displayed all the dainties and viands that could be wanted for a feast;
the mortuary cloth of king chilperic, with its three hundred golden
bees; the fantastic robes that excited the indignation of the bishop of
pontus and were figured with "lions, panthers, bears, dogs, forests,
rocks, hunters--all, in fact, that a painter can copy from nature"; and
the coat that charles of orleans once wore, on the sleeves of which
were embroidered the verses of a song beginning "_madame, je suis tout
joyeux_," the musical accompaniment of the words being wrought in gold
thread, and each note, of square shape in those days, formed with four
pearls.  he read of the room that was prepared at the palace at rheims
for the use of queen joan of burgundy and was decorated with "thirteen
hundred and twenty-one parrots, made in broidery, and blazoned with the
king's arms, and five hundred and sixty-one butterflies, whose wings
were similarly ornamented with the arms of the queen, the whole worked
in gold."  catherine de medicis had a mourning-bed made for her of
black velvet powdered with crescents and suns.  its curtains were of
damask, with leafy wreaths and garlands, figured upon a gold and silver
ground, and fringed along the edges with broideries of pearls, and it
stood in a room hung with rows of the queen's devices in cut black
velvet upon cloth of silver.  louis xiv had gold embroidered caryatides
fifteen feet high in his apartment.  the state bed of sobieski, king of
poland, was made of smyrna gold brocade embroidered in turquoises with
verses from the koran.  its supports were of silver gilt, beautifully
chased, and profusely set with enamelled and jewelled medallions.  it
had been taken from the turkish camp before vienna, and the standard of
mohammed had stood beneath the tremulous gilt of its canopy.

and so, for a whole year, he sought to accumulate the most exquisite
specimens that he could find of textile and embroidered work, getting
the dainty delhi muslins, finely wrought with gold-thread palmates and
stitched over with iridescent beetles' wings; the dacca gauzes, that
from their transparency are known in the east as "woven air," and
"running water," and "evening dew"; strange figured cloths from java;
elaborate yellow chinese hangings; books bound in tawny satins or fair
blue silks and wrought with _fleurs-de-lis_, birds and images; veils of
_lacis_ worked in hungary point; sicilian brocades and stiff spanish
velvets; georgian work, with its gilt coins, and japanese _foukousas_,
with their green-toned golds and their marvellously plumaged birds.

he had a special passion, also, for ecclesiastical vestments, as indeed
he had for everything connected with the service of the church.  in the
long cedar chests that lined the west gallery of his house, he had
stored away many rare and beautiful specimens of what is really the
raiment of the bride of christ, who must wear purple and jewels and
fine linen that she may hide the pallid macerated body that is worn by
the suffering that she seeks for and wounded by self-inflicted pain.
he possessed a gorgeous cope of crimson silk and gold-thread damask,
figured with a repeating pattern of golden pomegranates set in
six-petalled formal blossoms, beyond which on either side was the
pine-apple device wrought in seed-pearls. the orphreys were divided
into panels representing scenes from the life of the virgin, and the
coronation of the virgin was figured in coloured silks upon the hood.
this was italian work of the fifteenth century.  another cope was of
green velvet, embroidered with heart-shaped groups of acanthus-leaves,
from which spread long-stemmed white blossoms, the details of which
were picked out with silver thread and coloured crystals.  the morse
bore a seraph's head in gold-thread raised work.  the orphreys were
woven in a diaper of red and gold silk, and were starred with
medallions of many saints and martyrs, among whom was st. sebastian.
he had chasubles, also, of amber-coloured silk, and blue silk and gold
brocade, and yellow silk damask and cloth of gold, figured with
representations of the passion and crucifixion of christ, and
embroidered with lions and peacocks and other emblems; dalmatics of
white satin and pink silk damask, decorated with tulips and dolphins
and _fleurs-de-lis_; altar frontals of crimson velvet and blue linen; and
many corporals, chalice-veils, and sudaria.  in the mystic offices to
which such things were put, there was something that quickened his
imagination.

for these treasures, and everything that he collected in his lovely
house, were to be to him means of forgetfulness, modes by which he
could escape, for a season, from the fear that seemed to him at times
to be almost too great to be borne.  upon the walls of the lonely
locked room where he had spent so much of his boyhood, he had hung with
his own hands the terrible portrait whose changing features showed him
the real degradation of his life, and in front of it had draped the
purple-and-gold pall as a curtain.  for weeks he would not go there,
would forget the hideous painted thing, and get back his light heart,
his wonderful joyousness, his passionate absorption in mere existence.
then, suddenly, some night he would creep out of the house, go down to
dreadful places near blue gate fields, and stay there, day after day,
until he was driven away.  on his return he would sit in front of the
picture, sometimes loathing it and himself, but filled, at other
times, with that pride of individualism that is half the
fascination of sin, and smiling with secret pleasure at the misshapen
shadow that had to bear the burden that should have been his own.

after a few years he could not endure to be long out of england, and
gave up the villa that he had shared at trouville with lord henry, as
well as the little white walled-in house at algiers where they had more
than once spent the winter.  he hated to be separated from the picture
that was such a part of his life, and was also afraid that during his
absence some one might gain access to the room, in spite of the
elaborate bars that he had caused to be placed upon the door.

he was quite conscious that this would tell them nothing.  it was true
that the portrait still preserved, under all the foulness and ugliness
of the face, its marked likeness to himself; but what could they learn
from that?  he would laugh at any one who tried to taunt him.  he had
not painted it.  what was it to him how vile and full of shame it
looked?  even if he told them, would they believe it?

yet he was afraid.  sometimes when he was down at his great house in
nottinghamshire, entertaining the fashionable young men of his own rank
who were his chief companions, and astounding the county by the wanton
luxury and gorgeous splendour of his mode of life, he would suddenly
leave his guests and rush back to town to see that the door had not
been tampered with and that the picture was still there.  what if it
should be stolen?  the mere thought made him cold with horror.  surely
the world would know his secret then.  perhaps the world already
suspected it.

for, while he fascinated many, there were not a few who distrusted him.
he was very nearly blackballed at a west end club of which his birth
and social position fully entitled him to become a member, and it was
said that on one occasion, when he was brought by a friend into the
smoking-room of the churchill, the duke of berwick and another
gentleman got up in a marked manner and went out.  curious stories
became current about him after he had passed his twenty-fifth year.  it
was rumoured that he had been seen brawling with foreign sailors in a
low den in the distant parts of whitechapel, and that he consorted with
thieves and coiners and knew the mysteries of their trade.  his
extraordinary absences became notorious, and, when he used to reappear
again in society, men would whisper to each other in corners, or pass
him with a sneer, or look at him with cold searching eyes, as though
they were determined to discover his secret.

of such insolences and attempted slights he, of course, took no notice,
and in the opinion of most people his frank debonair manner, his
charming boyish smile, and the infinite grace of that wonderful youth
that seemed never to leave him, were in themselves a sufficient answer
to the calumnies, for so they termed them, that were circulated about
him.  it was remarked, however, that some of those who had been most
intimate with him appeared, after a time, to shun him.  women who had
wildly adored him, and for his sake had braved all social censure and
set convention at defiance, were seen to grow pallid with shame or
horror if dorian gray entered the room.

yet these whispered scandals only increased in the eyes of many his
strange and dangerous charm.  his great wealth was a certain element of
security.  society--civilized society, at least--is never very ready to
believe anything to the detriment of those who are both rich and
fascinating.  it feels instinctively that manners are of more
importance than morals, and, in its opinion, the highest respectability
is of much less value than the possession of a good _chef_.  and, after
all, it is a very poor consolation to be told that the man who has
given one a bad dinner, or poor wine, is irreproachable in his private
life.  even the cardinal virtues cannot atone for half-cold _entrees_, as
lord henry remarked once, in a discussion on the subject, and there is
possibly a good deal to be said for his view.  for the canons of good
society are, or should be, the same as the canons of art.  form is
absolutely essential to it.  it should have the dignity of a ceremony,
as well as its unreality, and should combine the insincere character of
a romantic play with the wit and beauty that make such plays delightful
to us.  is insincerity such a terrible thing?  i think not.  it is
merely a method by which we can multiply our personalities.

such, at any rate, was dorian gray's opinion.  he used to wonder at the
shallow psychology of those who conceive the ego in man as a thing
simple, permanent, reliable, and of one essence.  to him, man was a
being with myriad lives and myriad sensations, a complex multiform
creature that bore within itself strange legacies of thought and
passion, and whose very flesh was tainted with the monstrous maladies
of the dead.  he loved to stroll through the gaunt cold picture-gallery
of his country house and look at the various portraits of those whose
blood flowed in his veins.  here was philip herbert, described by
francis osborne, in his memoires on the reigns of queen elizabeth and
king james, as one who was "caressed by the court for his handsome
face, which kept him not long company."  was it young herbert's life
that he sometimes led?  had some strange poisonous germ crept from body
to body till it had reached his own?  was it some dim sense of that
ruined grace that had made him so suddenly, and almost without cause,
give utterance, in basil hallward's studio, to the mad prayer that had
so changed his life?  here, in gold-embroidered red doublet, jewelled
surcoat, and gilt-edged ruff and wristbands, stood sir anthony sherard,
with his silver-and-black armour piled at his feet.  what had this
man's legacy been?  had the lover of giovanna of naples bequeathed him
some inheritance of sin and shame?  were his own actions merely the
dreams that the dead man had not dared to realize?  here, from the
fading canvas, smiled lady elizabeth devereux, in her gauze hood, pearl
stomacher, and pink slashed sleeves.  a flower was in her right hand,
and her left clasped an enamelled collar of white and damask roses.  on
a table by her side lay a mandolin and an apple.  there were large
green rosettes upon her little pointed shoes.  he knew her life, and
the strange stories that were told about her lovers.  had he something
of her temperament in him?  these oval, heavy-lidded eyes seemed to
look curiously at him.  what of george willoughby, with his powdered
hair and fantastic patches?  how evil he looked!  the face was
saturnine and swarthy, and the sensual lips seemed to be twisted with
disdain.  delicate lace ruffles fell over the lean yellow hands that
were so overladen with rings.  he had been a macaroni of the eighteenth
century, and the friend, in his youth, of lord ferrars.  what of the
second lord beckenham, the companion of the prince regent in his
wildest days, and one of the witnesses at the secret marriage with mrs.
fitzherbert?  how proud and handsome he was, with his chestnut curls
and insolent pose!  what passions had he bequeathed?  the world had
looked upon him as infamous.  he had led the orgies at carlton house.
the star of the garter glittered upon his breast.  beside him hung the
portrait of his wife, a pallid, thin-lipped woman in black.  her blood,
also, stirred within him.  how curious it all seemed!  and his mother
with her lady hamilton face and her moist, wine-dashed lips--he knew
what he had got from her.  he had got from her his beauty, and his
passion for the beauty of others.  she laughed at him in her loose
bacchante dress.  there were vine leaves in her hair.  the purple
spilled from the cup she was holding.  the carnations of the painting
had withered, but the eyes were still wonderful in their depth and
brilliancy of colour.  they seemed to follow him wherever he went.

yet one had ancestors in literature as well as in one's own race,
nearer perhaps in type and temperament, many of them, and certainly
with an influence of which one was more absolutely conscious.  there
were times when it appeared to dorian gray that the whole of history
was merely the record of his own life, not as he had lived it in act
and circumstance, but as his imagination had created it for him, as it
had been in his brain and in his passions.  he felt that he had known
them all, those strange terrible figures that had passed across the
stage of the world and made sin so marvellous and evil so full of
subtlety.  it seemed to him that in some mysterious way their lives had
been his own.

the hero of the wonderful novel that had so influenced his life had
himself known this curious fancy.  in the seventh chapter he tells how,
crowned with laurel, lest lightning might strike him, he had sat, as
tiberius, in a garden at capri, reading the shameful books of
elephantis, while dwarfs and peacocks strutted round him and the
flute-player mocked the swinger of the censer; and, as caligula, had
caroused with the green-shirted jockeys in their stables and supped in
an ivory manger with a jewel-frontleted horse; and, as domitian, had
wandered through a corridor lined with marble mirrors, looking round
with haggard eyes for the reflection of the dagger that was to end his
days, and sick with that ennui, that terrible _taedium vitae_, that comes
on those to whom life denies nothing; and had peered through a clear
emerald at the red shambles of the circus and then, in a litter of
pearl and purple drawn by silver-shod mules, been carried through the
street of pomegranates to a house of gold and heard men cry on nero
caesar as he passed by; and, as elagabalus, had painted his face with
colours, and plied the distaff among the women, and brought the moon
from carthage and given her in mystic marriage to the sun.

over and over again dorian used to read this fantastic chapter, and the
two chapters immediately following, in which, as in some curious
tapestries or cunningly wrought enamels, were pictured the awful and
beautiful forms of those whom vice and blood and weariness had made
monstrous or mad:  filippo, duke of milan, who slew his wife and
painted her lips with a scarlet poison that her lover might suck death
from the dead thing he fondled; pietro barbi, the venetian, known as
paul the second, who sought in his vanity to assume the title of
formosus, and whose tiara, valued at two hundred thousand florins, was
bought at the price of a terrible sin; gian maria visconti, who used
hounds to chase living men and whose murdered body was covered with
roses by a harlot who had loved him; the borgia on his white horse,
with fratricide riding beside him and his mantle stained with the blood
of perotto; pietro riario, the young cardinal archbishop of florence,
child and minion of sixtus iv, whose beauty was equalled only by his
debauchery, and who received leonora of aragon in a pavilion of white
and crimson silk, filled with nymphs and centaurs, and gilded a boy
that he might serve at the feast as ganymede or hylas; ezzelin, whose
melancholy could be cured only by the spectacle of death, and who had a
passion for red blood, as other men have for red wine--the son of the
fiend, as was reported, and one who had cheated his father at dice when
gambling with him for his own soul; giambattista cibo, who in mockery
took the name of innocent and into whose torpid veins the blood of
three lads was infused by a jewish doctor; sigismondo malatesta, the
lover of isotta and the lord of rimini, whose effigy was burned at rome
as the enemy of god and man, who strangled polyssena with a napkin, and
gave poison to ginevra d'este in a cup of emerald, and in honour of a
shameful passion built a pagan church for christian worship; charles
vi, who had so wildly adored his brother's wife that a leper had warned
him of the insanity that was coming on him, and who, when his brain had
sickened and grown strange, could only be soothed by saracen cards
painted with the images of love and death and madness; and, in his
trimmed jerkin and jewelled cap and acanthuslike curls, grifonetto
baglioni, who slew astorre with his bride, and simonetto with his page,
and whose comeliness was such that, as he lay dying in the yellow
piazza of perugia, those who had hated him could not choose but weep,
and atalanta, who had cursed him, blessed him.

there was a horrible fascination in them all.  he saw them at night,
and they troubled his imagination in the day.  the renaissance knew of
strange manners of poisoning--poisoning by a helmet and a lighted
torch, by an embroidered glove and a jewelled fan, by a gilded pomander
and by an amber chain.  dorian gray had been poisoned by a book.  there
were moments when he looked on evil simply as a mode through which he
could realize his conception of the beautiful.



chapter 12

it was on the ninth of november, the eve of his own thirty-eighth
birthday, as he often remembered afterwards.

he was walking home about eleven o'clock from lord henry's, where he
had been dining, and was wrapped in heavy furs, as the night was cold
and foggy.  at the corner of grosvenor square and south audley street,
a man passed him in the mist, walking very fast and with the collar of
his grey ulster turned up.  he had a bag in his hand.  dorian
recognized him.  it was basil hallward.  a strange sense of fear, for
which he could not account, came over him.  he made no sign of
recognition and went on quickly in the direction of his own house.

but hallward had seen him.  dorian heard him first stopping on the
pavement and then hurrying after him.  in a few moments, his hand was
on his arm.

"dorian!  what an extraordinary piece of luck!  i have been waiting for
you in your library ever since nine o'clock. finally i took pity on
your tired servant and told him to go to bed, as he let me out.  i am
off to paris by the midnight train, and i particularly wanted to see
you before i left.  i thought it was you, or rather your fur coat, as
you passed me.  but i wasn't quite sure.  didn't you recognize me?"

"in this fog, my dear basil?  why, i can't even recognize grosvenor
square.  i believe my house is somewhere about here, but i don't feel
at all certain about it.  i am sorry you are going away, as i have not
seen you for ages.  but i suppose you will be back soon?"

"no:  i am going to be out of england for six months.  i intend to take
a studio in paris and shut myself up till i have finished a great
picture i have in my head.  however, it wasn't about myself i wanted to
talk.  here we are at your door.  let me come in for a moment.  i have
something to say to you."

"i shall be charmed.  but won't you miss your train?" said dorian gray
languidly as he passed up the steps and opened the door with his
latch-key.

the lamplight struggled out through the fog, and hallward looked at his
watch.  "i have heaps of time," he answered.  "the train doesn't go
till twelve-fifteen, and it is only just eleven.  in fact, i was on my
way to the club to look for you, when i met you.  you see, i shan't
have any delay about luggage, as i have sent on my heavy things.  all i
have with me is in this bag, and i can easily get to victoria in twenty
minutes."

dorian looked at him and smiled.  "what a way for a fashionable painter
to travel!  a gladstone bag and an ulster!  come in, or the fog will
get into the house.  and mind you don't talk about anything serious.
nothing is serious nowadays.  at least nothing should be."

hallward shook his head, as he entered, and followed dorian into the
library.  there was a bright wood fire blazing in the large open
hearth.  the lamps were lit, and an open dutch silver spirit-case
stood, with some siphons of soda-water and large cut-glass tumblers, on
a little marqueterie table.

"you see your servant made me quite at home, dorian.  he gave me
everything i wanted, including your best gold-tipped cigarettes.  he is
a most hospitable creature.  i like him much better than the frenchman
you used to have.  what has become of the frenchman, by the bye?"

dorian shrugged his shoulders.  "i believe he married lady radley's
maid, and has established her in paris as an english dressmaker.
anglomania is very fashionable over there now, i hear.  it seems silly
of the french, doesn't it?  but--do you know?--he was not at all a bad
servant.  i never liked him, but i had nothing to complain about.  one
often imagines things that are quite absurd.  he was really very
devoted to me and seemed quite sorry when he went away.  have another
brandy-and-soda? or would you like hock-and-seltzer? i always take
hock-and-seltzer myself.  there is sure to be some in the next room."

"thanks, i won't have anything more," said the painter, taking his cap
and coat off and throwing them on the bag that he had placed in the
corner.  "and now, my dear fellow, i want to speak to you seriously.
don't frown like that.  you make it so much more difficult for me."

"what is it all about?" cried dorian in his petulant way, flinging
himself down on the sofa.  "i hope it is not about myself.  i am tired
of myself to-night. i should like to be somebody else."

"it is about yourself," answered hallward in his grave deep voice, "and
i must say it to you.  i shall only keep you half an hour."

dorian sighed and lit a cigarette.  "half an hour!" he murmured.

"it is not much to ask of you, dorian, and it is entirely for your own
sake that i am speaking.  i think it right that you should know that
the most dreadful things are being said against you in london."

"i don't wish to know anything about them.  i love scandals about other
people, but scandals about myself don't interest me.  they have not got
the charm of novelty."

"they must interest you, dorian.  every gentleman is interested in his
good name.  you don't want people to talk of you as something vile and
degraded.  of course, you have your position, and your wealth, and all
that kind of thing.  but position and wealth are not everything.  mind
you, i don't believe these rumours at all.  at least, i can't believe
them when i see you.  sin is a thing that writes itself across a man's
face.  it cannot be concealed.  people talk sometimes of secret vices.
there are no such things.  if a wretched man has a vice, it shows
itself in the lines of his mouth, the droop of his eyelids, the
moulding of his hands even.  somebody--i won't mention his name, but
you know him--came to me last year to have his portrait done.  i had
never seen him before, and had never heard anything about him at the
time, though i have heard a good deal since.  he offered an extravagant
price.  i refused him.  there was something in the shape of his fingers
that i hated.  i know now that i was quite right in what i fancied
about him.  his life is dreadful.  but you, dorian, with your pure,
bright, innocent face, and your marvellous untroubled youth--i can't
believe anything against you.  and yet i see you very seldom, and you
never come down to the studio now, and when i am away from you, and i
hear all these hideous things that people are whispering about you, i
don't know what to say.  why is it, dorian, that a man like the duke of
berwick leaves the room of a club when you enter it?  why is it that so
many gentlemen in london will neither go to your house or invite you to
theirs?  you used to be a friend of lord staveley.  i met him at dinner
last week.  your name happened to come up in conversation, in
connection with the miniatures you have lent to the exhibition at the
dudley.  staveley curled his lip and said that you might have the most
artistic tastes, but that you were a man whom no pure-minded girl
should be allowed to know, and whom no chaste woman should sit in the
same room with.  i reminded him that i was a friend of yours, and asked
him what he meant.  he told me.  he told me right out before everybody.
it was horrible!  why is your friendship so fatal to young men?  there
was that wretched boy in the guards who committed suicide.  you were
his great friend.  there was sir henry ashton, who had to leave england
with a tarnished name.  you and he were inseparable.  what about adrian
singleton and his dreadful end?  what about lord kent's only son and
his career?  i met his father yesterday in st. james's street.  he
seemed broken with shame and sorrow.  what about the young duke of
perth?  what sort of life has he got now?  what gentleman would
associate with him?"

"stop, basil.  you are talking about things of which you know nothing,"
said dorian gray, biting his lip, and with a note of infinite contempt
in his voice.  "you ask me why berwick leaves a room when i enter it.
it is because i know everything about his life, not because he knows
anything about mine.  with such blood as he has in his veins, how could
his record be clean?  you ask me about henry ashton and young perth.
did i teach the one his vices, and the other his debauchery?  if kent's
silly son takes his wife from the streets, what is that to me?  if
adrian singleton writes his friend's name across a bill, am i his
keeper?  i know how people chatter in england.  the middle classes air
their moral prejudices over their gross dinner-tables, and whisper
about what they call the profligacies of their betters in order to try
and pretend that they are in smart society and on intimate terms with
the people they slander.  in this country, it is enough for a man to
have distinction and brains for every common tongue to wag against him.
and what sort of lives do these people, who pose as being moral, lead
themselves?  my dear fellow, you forget that we are in the native land
of the hypocrite."

"dorian," cried hallward, "that is not the question.  england is bad
enough i know, and english society is all wrong.  that is the reason
why i want you to be fine.  you have not been fine.  one has a right to
judge of a man by the effect he has over his friends.  yours seem to
lose all sense of honour, of goodness, of purity.  you have filled them
with a madness for pleasure.  they have gone down into the depths.  you
led them there.  yes:  you led them there, and yet you can smile, as
you are smiling now.  and there is worse behind.  i know you and harry
are inseparable.  surely for that reason, if for none other, you should
not have made his sister's name a by-word."

"take care, basil.  you go too far."

"i must speak, and you must listen.  you shall listen.  when you met
lady gwendolen, not a breath of scandal had ever touched her.  is there
a single decent woman in london now who would drive with her in the
park?  why, even her children are not allowed to live with her.  then
there are other stories--stories that you have been seen creeping at
dawn out of dreadful houses and slinking in disguise into the foulest
dens in london.  are they true?  can they be true?  when i first heard
them, i laughed.  i hear them now, and they make me shudder.  what
about your country-house and the life that is led there?  dorian, you
don't know what is said about you.  i won't tell you that i don't want
to preach to you.  i remember harry saying once that every man who
turned himself into an amateur curate for the moment always began by
saying that, and then proceeded to break his word.  i do want to preach
to you.  i want you to lead such a life as will make the world respect
you.  i want you to have a clean name and a fair record.  i want you to
get rid of the dreadful people you associate with.  don't shrug your
shoulders like that.  don't be so indifferent.  you have a wonderful
influence.  let it be for good, not for evil.  they say that you
corrupt every one with whom you become intimate, and that it is quite
sufficient for you to enter a house for shame of some kind to follow
after.  i don't know whether it is so or not.  how should i know?  but
it is said of you.  i am told things that it seems impossible to doubt.
lord gloucester was one of my greatest friends at oxford.  he showed me
a letter that his wife had written to him when she was dying alone in
her villa at mentone.  your name was implicated in the most terrible
confession i ever read.  i told him that it was absurd--that i knew you
thoroughly and that you were incapable of anything of the kind.  know
you?  i wonder do i know you?  before i could answer that, i should
have to see your soul."

"to see my soul!" muttered dorian gray, starting up from the sofa and
turning almost white from fear.

"yes," answered hallward gravely, and with deep-toned sorrow in his
voice, "to see your soul.  but only god can do that."

a bitter laugh of mockery broke from the lips of the younger man.  "you
shall see it yourself, to-night!" he cried, seizing a lamp from the
table.  "come:  it is your own handiwork.  why shouldn't you look at
it?  you can tell the world all about it afterwards, if you choose.
nobody would believe you.  if they did believe you, they would like me
all the better for it.  i know the age better than you do, though you
will prate about it so tediously.  come, i tell you.  you have
chattered enough about corruption.  now you shall look on it face to
face."

there was the madness of pride in every word he uttered.  he stamped
his foot upon the ground in his boyish insolent manner.  he felt a
terrible joy at the thought that some one else was to share his secret,
and that the man who had painted the portrait that was the origin of
all his shame was to be burdened for the rest of his life with the
hideous memory of what he had done.

"yes," he continued, coming closer to him and looking steadfastly into
his stern eyes, "i shall show you my soul.  you shall see the thing
that you fancy only god can see."

hallward started back.  "this is blasphemy, dorian!" he cried.  "you
must not say things like that.  they are horrible, and they don't mean
anything."

"you think so?"  he laughed again.

"i know so.  as for what i said to you to-night, i said it for your
good.  you know i have been always a stanch friend to you."

"don't touch me.  finish what you have to say."

a twisted flash of pain shot across the painter's face.  he paused for
a moment, and a wild feeling of pity came over him.  after all, what
right had he to pry into the life of dorian gray?  if he had done a
tithe of what was rumoured about him, how much he must have suffered!
then he straightened himself up, and walked over to the fire-place, and
stood there, looking at the burning logs with their frostlike ashes and
their throbbing cores of flame.

"i am waiting, basil," said the young man in a hard clear voice.

he turned round.  "what i have to say is this," he cried.  "you must
give me some answer to these horrible charges that are made against
you.  if you tell me that they are absolutely untrue from beginning to
end, i shall believe you.  deny them, dorian, deny them!  can't you see
what i am going through?  my god! don't tell me that you are bad, and
corrupt, and shameful."

dorian gray smiled.  there was a curl of contempt in his lips.  "come
upstairs, basil," he said quietly.  "i keep a diary of my life from day
to day, and it never leaves the room in which it is written.  i shall
show it to you if you come with me."

"i shall come with you, dorian, if you wish it.  i see i have missed my
train.  that makes no matter.  i can go to-morrow. but don't ask me to
read anything to-night. all i want is a plain answer to my question."

"that shall be given to you upstairs.  i could not give it here.  you
will not have to read long."



chapter 13

he passed out of the room and began the ascent, basil hallward
following close behind.  they walked softly, as men do instinctively at
night.  the lamp cast fantastic shadows on the wall and staircase.  a
rising wind made some of the windows rattle.

when they reached the top landing, dorian set the lamp down on the
floor, and taking out the key, turned it in the lock.  "you insist on
knowing, basil?" he asked in a low voice.

"yes."

"i am delighted," he answered, smiling.  then he added, somewhat
harshly, "you are the one man in the world who is entitled to know
everything about me.  you have had more to do with my life than you
think"; and, taking up the lamp, he opened the door and went in.  a
cold current of air passed them, and the light shot up for a moment in
a flame of murky orange.  he shuddered.  "shut the door behind you," he
whispered, as he placed the lamp on the table.

hallward glanced round him with a puzzled expression.  the room looked
as if it had not been lived in for years.  a faded flemish tapestry, a
curtained picture, an old italian _cassone_, and an almost empty
book-case--that was all that it seemed to contain, besides a chair and
a table.  as dorian gray was lighting a half-burned candle that was
standing on the mantelshelf, he saw that the whole place was covered
with dust and that the carpet was in holes.  a mouse ran scuffling
behind the wainscoting.  there was a damp odour of mildew.

"so you think that it is only god who sees the soul, basil?  draw that
curtain back, and you will see mine."

the voice that spoke was cold and cruel.  "you are mad, dorian, or
playing a part," muttered hallward, frowning.

"you won't? then i must do it myself," said the young man, and he tore
the curtain from its rod and flung it on the ground.

an exclamation of horror broke from the painter's lips as he saw in the
dim light the hideous face on the canvas grinning at him.  there was
something in its expression that filled him with disgust and loathing.
good heavens! it was dorian gray's own face that he was looking at!
the horror, whatever it was, had not yet entirely spoiled that
marvellous beauty.  there was still some gold in the thinning hair and
some scarlet on the sensual mouth.  the sodden eyes had kept something
of the loveliness of their blue, the noble curves had not yet
completely passed away from chiselled nostrils and from plastic throat.
yes, it was dorian himself.  but who had done it?  he seemed to
recognize his own brushwork, and the frame was his own design.  the
idea was monstrous, yet he felt afraid.  he seized the lighted candle,
and held it to the picture.  in the left-hand corner was his own name,
traced in long letters of bright vermilion.

it was some foul parody, some infamous ignoble satire.  he had never
done that.  still, it was his own picture.  he knew it, and he felt as
if his blood had changed in a moment from fire to sluggish ice.  his
own picture!  what did it mean?  why had it altered?  he turned and
looked at dorian gray with the eyes of a sick man.  his mouth twitched,
and his parched tongue seemed unable to articulate.  he passed his hand
across his forehead.  it was dank with clammy sweat.

the young man was leaning against the mantelshelf, watching him with
that strange expression that one sees on the faces of those who are
absorbed in a play when some great artist is acting.  there was neither
real sorrow in it nor real joy.  there was simply the passion of the
spectator, with perhaps a flicker of triumph in his eyes.  he had taken
the flower out of his coat, and was smelling it, or pretending to do so.

"what does this mean?" cried hallward, at last.  his own voice sounded
shrill and curious in his ears.

"years ago, when i was a boy," said dorian gray, crushing the flower in
his hand, "you met me, flattered me, and taught me to be vain of my
good looks.  one day you introduced me to a friend of yours, who
explained to me the wonder of youth, and you finished a portrait of me
that revealed to me the wonder of beauty.  in a mad moment that, even
now, i don't know whether i regret or not, i made a wish, perhaps you
would call it a prayer...."

"i remember it!  oh, how well i remember it!  no! the thing is
impossible.  the room is damp.  mildew has got into the canvas.  the
paints i used had some wretched mineral poison in them.  i tell you the
thing is impossible."

"ah, what is impossible?" murmured the young man, going over to the
window and leaning his forehead against the cold, mist-stained glass.

"you told me you had destroyed it."

"i was wrong.  it has destroyed me."

"i don't believe it is my picture."

"can't you see your ideal in it?" said dorian bitterly.

"my ideal, as you call it..."

"as you called it."

"there was nothing evil in it, nothing shameful.  you were to me such
an ideal as i shall never meet again.  this is the face of a satyr."

"it is the face of my soul."

"christ! what a thing i must have worshipped!  it has the eyes of a
devil."

"each of us has heaven and hell in him, basil," cried dorian with a
wild gesture of despair.

hallward turned again to the portrait and gazed at it.  "my god!  if it
is true," he exclaimed, "and this is what you have done with your life,
why, you must be worse even than those who talk against you fancy you
to be!" he held the light up again to the canvas and examined it.  the
surface seemed to be quite undisturbed and as he had left it.  it was
from within, apparently, that the foulness and horror had come.
through some strange quickening of inner life the leprosies of sin were
slowly eating the thing away.  the rotting of a corpse in a watery
grave was not so fearful.

his hand shook, and the candle fell from its socket on the floor and
lay there sputtering.  he placed his foot on it and put it out.  then
he flung himself into the rickety chair that was standing by the table
and buried his face in his hands.

"good god, dorian, what a lesson!  what an awful lesson!" there was no
answer, but he could hear the young man sobbing at the window.  "pray,
dorian, pray," he murmured.  "what is it that one was taught to say in
one's boyhood?  'lead us not into temptation.  forgive us our sins.
wash away our iniquities.'  let us say that together.  the prayer of
your pride has been answered.  the prayer of your repentance will be
answered also.  i worshipped you too much.  i am punished for it.  you
worshipped yourself too much.  we are both punished."

dorian gray turned slowly around and looked at him with tear-dimmed
eyes.  "it is too late, basil," he faltered.

"it is never too late, dorian.  let us kneel down and try if we cannot
remember a prayer.  isn't there a verse somewhere, 'though your sins be
as scarlet, yet i will make them as white as snow'?"

"those words mean nothing to me now."

"hush!  don't say that.  you have done enough evil in your life.  my
god!  don't you see that accursed thing leering at us?"

dorian gray glanced at the picture, and suddenly an uncontrollable
feeling of hatred for basil hallward came over him, as though it had
been suggested to him by the image on the canvas, whispered into his
ear by those grinning lips.  the mad passions of a hunted animal
stirred within him, and he loathed the man who was seated at the table,
more than in his whole life he had ever loathed anything.  he glanced
wildly around.  something glimmered on the top of the painted chest
that faced him.  his eye fell on it.  he knew what it was.  it was a
knife that he had brought up, some days before, to cut a piece of cord,
and had forgotten to take away with him.  he moved slowly towards it,
passing hallward as he did so.  as soon as he got behind him, he seized
it and turned round.  hallward stirred in his chair as if he was going
to rise.  he rushed at him and dug the knife into the great vein that
is behind the ear, crushing the man's head down on the table and
stabbing again and again.

there was a stifled groan and the horrible sound of some one choking
with blood.  three times the outstretched arms shot up convulsively,
waving grotesque, stiff-fingered hands in the air.  he stabbed him
twice more, but the man did not move.  something began to trickle on
the floor.  he waited for a moment, still pressing the head down.  then
he threw the knife on the table, and listened.

he could hear nothing, but the drip, drip on the threadbare carpet.  he
opened the door and went out on the landing.  the house was absolutely
quiet.  no one was about.  for a few seconds he stood bending over the
balustrade and peering down into the black seething well of darkness.
then he took out the key and returned to the room, locking himself in
as he did so.

the thing was still seated in the chair, straining over the table with
bowed head, and humped back, and long fantastic arms.  had it not been
for the red jagged tear in the neck and the clotted black pool that was
slowly widening on the table, one would have said that the man was
simply asleep.

how quickly it had all been done!  he felt strangely calm, and walking
over to the window, opened it and stepped out on the balcony.  the wind
had blown the fog away, and the sky was like a monstrous peacock's
tail, starred with myriads of golden eyes.  he looked down and saw the
policeman going his rounds and flashing the long beam of his lantern on
the doors of the silent houses.  the crimson spot of a prowling hansom
gleamed at the corner and then vanished.  a woman in a fluttering shawl
was creeping slowly by the railings, staggering as she went.  now and
then she stopped and peered back.  once, she began to sing in a hoarse
voice.  the policeman strolled over and said something to her.  she
stumbled away, laughing.  a bitter blast swept across the square.  the
gas-lamps flickered and became blue, and the leafless trees shook their
black iron branches to and fro.  he shivered and went back, closing the
window behind him.

having reached the door, he turned the key and opened it.  he did not
even glance at the murdered man.  he felt that the secret of the whole
thing was not to realize the situation.  the friend who had painted the
fatal portrait to which all his misery had been due had gone out of his
life.  that was enough.

then he remembered the lamp.  it was a rather curious one of moorish
workmanship, made of dull silver inlaid with arabesques of burnished
steel, and studded with coarse turquoises.  perhaps it might be missed
by his servant, and questions would be asked.  he hesitated for a
moment, then he turned back and took it from the table.  he could not
help seeing the dead thing.  how still it was!  how horribly white the
long hands looked!  it was like a dreadful wax image.

having locked the door behind him, he crept quietly downstairs.  the
woodwork creaked and seemed to cry out as if in pain.  he stopped
several times and waited.  no:  everything was still.  it was merely
the sound of his own footsteps.

when he reached the library, he saw the bag and coat in the corner.
they must be hidden away somewhere.  he unlocked a secret press that
was in the wainscoting, a press in which he kept his own curious
disguises, and put them into it.  he could easily burn them afterwards.
then he pulled out his watch.  it was twenty minutes to two.

he sat down and began to think.  every year--every month, almost--men
were strangled in england for what he had done.  there had been a
madness of murder in the air.  some red star had come too close to the
earth.... and yet, what evidence was there against him?  basil hallward
had left the house at eleven.  no one had seen him come in again.  most
of the servants were at selby royal.  his valet had gone to bed....
paris!  yes.  it was to paris that basil had gone, and by the midnight
train, as he had intended.  with his curious reserved habits, it would
be months before any suspicions would be roused.  months!  everything
could be destroyed long before then.

a sudden thought struck him.  he put on his fur coat and hat and went
out into the hall.  there he paused, hearing the slow heavy tread of
the policeman on the pavement outside and seeing the flash of the
bull's-eye reflected in the window.  he waited and held his breath.

after a few moments he drew back the latch and slipped out, shutting
the door very gently behind him.  then he began ringing the bell.  in
about five minutes his valet appeared, half-dressed and looking very
drowsy.

"i am sorry to have had to wake you up, francis," he said, stepping in;
"but i had forgotten my latch-key. what time is it?"

"ten minutes past two, sir," answered the man, looking at the clock and
blinking.

"ten minutes past two?  how horribly late!  you must wake me at nine
to-morrow. i have some work to do."

"all right, sir."

"did any one call this evening?"

"mr. hallward, sir.  he stayed here till eleven, and then he went away
to catch his train."

"oh!  i am sorry i didn't see him.  did he leave any message?"

"no, sir, except that he would write to you from paris, if he did not
find you at the club."

"that will do, francis.  don't forget to call me at nine to-morrow."

"no, sir."

the man shambled down the passage in his slippers.

dorian gray threw his hat and coat upon the table and passed into the
library.  for a quarter of an hour he walked up and down the room,
biting his lip and thinking.  then he took down the blue book from one
of the shelves and began to turn over the leaves.  "alan campbell, 152,
hertford street, mayfair."  yes; that was the man he wanted.



chapter 14

at nine o'clock the next morning his servant came in with a cup of
chocolate on a tray and opened the shutters.  dorian was sleeping quite
peacefully, lying on his right side, with one hand underneath his
cheek.  he looked like a boy who had been tired out with play, or study.

the man had to touch him twice on the shoulder before he woke, and as
he opened his eyes a faint smile passed across his lips, as though he
had been lost in some delightful dream.  yet he had not dreamed at all.
his night had been untroubled by any images of pleasure or of pain.
but youth smiles without any reason.  it is one of its chiefest charms.

he turned round, and leaning upon his elbow, began to sip his
chocolate.  the mellow november sun came streaming into the room.  the
sky was bright, and there was a genial warmth in the air.  it was
almost like a morning in may.

gradually the events of the preceding night crept with silent,
blood-stained feet into his brain and reconstructed themselves there
with terrible distinctness.  he winced at the memory of all that he had
suffered, and for a moment the same curious feeling of loathing for
basil hallward that had made him kill him as he sat in the chair came
back to him, and he grew cold with passion.  the dead man was still
sitting there, too, and in the sunlight now.  how horrible that was!
such hideous things were for the darkness, not for the day.

he felt that if he brooded on what he had gone through he would sicken
or grow mad.  there were sins whose fascination was more in the memory
than in the doing of them, strange triumphs that gratified the pride
more than the passions, and gave to the intellect a quickened sense of
joy, greater than any joy they brought, or could ever bring, to the
senses.  but this was not one of them.  it was a thing to be driven out
of the mind, to be drugged with poppies, to be strangled lest it might
strangle one itself.

when the half-hour struck, he passed his hand across his forehead, and
then got up hastily and dressed himself with even more than his usual
care, giving a good deal of attention to the choice of his necktie and
scarf-pin and changing his rings more than once.  he spent a long time
also over breakfast, tasting the various dishes, talking to his valet
about some new liveries that he was thinking of getting made for the
servants at selby, and going through his correspondence.  at some of
the letters, he smiled.  three of them bored him.  one he read several
times over and then tore up with a slight look of annoyance in his
face.  "that awful thing, a woman's memory!" as lord henry had once
said.

after he had drunk his cup of black coffee, he wiped his lips slowly
with a napkin, motioned to his servant to wait, and going over to the
table, sat down and wrote two letters.  one he put in his pocket, the
other he handed to the valet.

"take this round to 152, hertford street, francis, and if mr. campbell
is out of town, get his address."

as soon as he was alone, he lit a cigarette and began sketching upon a
piece of paper, drawing first flowers and bits of architecture, and
then human faces.  suddenly he remarked that every face that he drew
seemed to have a fantastic likeness to basil hallward.  he frowned, and
getting up, went over to the book-case and took out a volume at hazard.
he was determined that he would not think about what had happened until
it became absolutely necessary that he should do so.

when he had stretched himself on the sofa, he looked at the title-page
of the book.  it was gautier's emaux et camees, charpentier's
japanese-paper edition, with the jacquemart etching.  the binding was
of citron-green leather, with a design of gilt trellis-work and dotted
pomegranates.  it had been given to him by adrian singleton.  as he
turned over the pages, his eye fell on the poem about the hand of
lacenaire, the cold yellow hand "_du supplice encore mal lavee_," with
its downy red hairs and its "_doigts de faune_."  he glanced at his own
white taper fingers, shuddering slightly in spite of himself, and
passed on, till he came to those lovely stanzas upon venice:

     sur une gamme chromatique,
       le sein de perles ruisselant,
     la venus de l'adriatique
       sort de l'eau son corps rose et blanc.

     les domes, sur l'azur des ondes
       suivant la phrase au pur contour,
     s'enflent comme des gorges rondes
       que souleve un soupir d'amour.

     l'esquif aborde et me depose,
       jetant son amarre au pilier,
     devant une facade rose,
       sur le marbre d'un escalier.


how exquisite they were!  as one read them, one seemed to be floating
down the green water-ways of the pink and pearl city, seated in a black
gondola with silver prow and trailing curtains.  the mere lines looked
to him like those straight lines of turquoise-blue that follow one as
one pushes out to the lido.  the sudden flashes of colour reminded him
of the gleam of the opal-and-iris-throated birds that flutter round the
tall honeycombed campanile, or stalk, with such stately grace, through
the dim, dust-stained arcades.  leaning back with half-closed eyes, he
kept saying over and over to himself:

     "devant une facade rose,
        sur le marbre d'un escalier."

the whole of venice was in those two lines.  he remembered the autumn
that he had passed there, and a wonderful love that had stirred him to
mad delightful follies.  there was romance in every place.  but venice,
like oxford, had kept the background for romance, and, to the true
romantic, background was everything, or almost everything.  basil had
been with him part of the time, and had gone wild over tintoret.  poor
basil!  what a horrible way for a man to die!

he sighed, and took up the volume again, and tried to forget.  he read
of the swallows that fly in and out of the little _cafe_ at smyrna where
the hadjis sit counting their amber beads and the turbaned merchants
smoke their long tasselled pipes and talk gravely to each other; he
read of the obelisk in the place de la concorde that weeps tears of
granite in its lonely sunless exile and longs to be back by the hot,
lotus-covered nile, where there are sphinxes, and rose-red ibises, and
white vultures with gilded claws, and crocodiles with small beryl eyes
that crawl over the green steaming mud; he began to brood over those
verses which, drawing music from kiss-stained marble, tell of that
curious statue that gautier compares to a contralto voice, the "_monstre
charmant_" that couches in the porphyry-room of the louvre.  but after a
time the book fell from his hand.  he grew nervous, and a horrible fit
of terror came over him.  what if alan campbell should be out of
england?  days would elapse before he could come back.  perhaps he
might refuse to come.  what could he do then?  every moment was of
vital importance.

they had been great friends once, five years before--almost
inseparable, indeed.  then the intimacy had come suddenly to an end.
when they met in society now, it was only dorian gray who smiled:  alan
campbell never did.

he was an extremely clever young man, though he had no real
appreciation of the visible arts, and whatever little sense of the
beauty of poetry he possessed he had gained entirely from dorian.  his
dominant intellectual passion was for science.  at cambridge he had
spent a great deal of his time working in the laboratory, and had taken
a good class in the natural science tripos of his year.  indeed, he was
still devoted to the study of chemistry, and had a laboratory of his
own in which he used to shut himself up all day long, greatly to the
annoyance of his mother, who had set her heart on his standing for
parliament and had a vague idea that a chemist was a person who made up
prescriptions.  he was an excellent musician, however, as well, and
played both the violin and the piano better than most amateurs.  in
fact, it was music that had first brought him and dorian gray
together--music and that indefinable attraction that dorian seemed to
be able to exercise whenever he wished--and, indeed, exercised often
without being conscious of it.  they had met at lady berkshire's the
night that rubinstein played there, and after that used to be always
seen together at the opera and wherever good music was going on.  for
eighteen months their intimacy lasted.  campbell was always either at
selby royal or in grosvenor square.  to him, as to many others, dorian
gray was the type of everything that is wonderful and fascinating in
life.  whether or not a quarrel had taken place between them no one
ever knew.  but suddenly people remarked that they scarcely spoke when
they met and that campbell seemed always to go away early from any
party at which dorian gray was present.  he had changed, too--was
strangely melancholy at times, appeared almost to dislike hearing
music, and would never himself play, giving as his excuse, when he was
called upon, that he was so absorbed in science that he had no time
left in which to practise.  and this was certainly true.  every day he
seemed to become more interested in biology, and his name appeared once
or twice in some of the scientific reviews in connection with certain
curious experiments.

this was the man dorian gray was waiting for.  every second he kept
glancing at the clock.  as the minutes went by he became horribly
agitated.  at last he got up and began to pace up and down the room,
looking like a beautiful caged thing.  he took long stealthy strides.
his hands were curiously cold.

the suspense became unbearable.  time seemed to him to be crawling with
feet of lead, while he by monstrous winds was being swept towards the
jagged edge of some black cleft of precipice.  he knew what was waiting
for him there; saw it, indeed, and, shuddering, crushed with dank hands
his burning lids as though he would have robbed the very brain of sight
and driven the eyeballs back into their cave.  it was useless.  the
brain had its own food on which it battened, and the imagination, made
grotesque by terror, twisted and distorted as a living thing by pain,
danced like some foul puppet on a stand and grinned through moving
masks.  then, suddenly, time stopped for him.  yes:  that blind,
slow-breathing thing crawled no more, and horrible thoughts, time being
dead, raced nimbly on in front, and dragged a hideous future from its
grave, and showed it to him.  he stared at it.  its very horror made
him stone.

at last the door opened and his servant entered.  he turned glazed eyes
upon him.

"mr. campbell, sir," said the man.

a sigh of relief broke from his parched lips, and the colour came back
to his cheeks.

"ask him to come in at once, francis."  he felt that he was himself
again.  his mood of cowardice had passed away.

the man bowed and retired.  in a few moments, alan campbell walked in,
looking very stern and rather pale, his pallor being intensified by his
coal-black hair and dark eyebrows.

"alan!  this is kind of you.  i thank you for coming."

"i had intended never to enter your house again, gray.  but you said it
was a matter of life and death."  his voice was hard and cold.  he
spoke with slow deliberation.  there was a look of contempt in the
steady searching gaze that he turned on dorian.  he kept his hands in
the pockets of his astrakhan coat, and seemed not to have noticed the
gesture with which he had been greeted.

"yes:  it is a matter of life and death, alan, and to more than one
person.  sit down."

campbell took a chair by the table, and dorian sat opposite to him.
the two men's eyes met.  in dorian's there was infinite pity.  he knew
that what he was going to do was dreadful.

after a strained moment of silence, he leaned across and said, very
quietly, but watching the effect of each word upon the face of him he
had sent for, "alan, in a locked room at the top of this house, a room
to which nobody but myself has access, a dead man is seated at a table.
he has been dead ten hours now.  don't stir, and don't look at me like
that.  who the man is, why he died, how he died, are matters that do
not concern you.  what you have to do is this--"

"stop, gray.  i don't want to know anything further.  whether what you
have told me is true or not true doesn't concern me.  i entirely
decline to be mixed up in your life.  keep your horrible secrets to
yourself.  they don't interest me any more."

"alan, they will have to interest you.  this one will have to interest
you.  i am awfully sorry for you, alan.  but i can't help myself.  you
are the one man who is able to save me.  i am forced to bring you into
the matter.  i have no option.  alan, you are scientific.  you know
about chemistry and things of that kind.  you have made experiments.
what you have got to do is to destroy the thing that is upstairs--to
destroy it so that not a vestige of it will be left.  nobody saw this
person come into the house.  indeed, at the present moment he is
supposed to be in paris.  he will not be missed for months.  when he is
missed, there must be no trace of him found here.  you, alan, you must
change him, and everything that belongs to him, into a handful of ashes
that i may scatter in the air."

"you are mad, dorian."

"ah!  i was waiting for you to call me dorian."

"you are mad, i tell you--mad to imagine that i would raise a finger to
help you, mad to make this monstrous confession.  i will have nothing
to do with this matter, whatever it is.  do you think i am going to
peril my reputation for you?  what is it to me what devil's work you
are up to?"

"it was suicide, alan."

"i am glad of that.  but who drove him to it?  you, i should fancy."

"do you still refuse to do this for me?"

"of course i refuse.  i will have absolutely nothing to do with it.  i
don't care what shame comes on you.  you deserve it all.  i should not
be sorry to see you disgraced, publicly disgraced.  how dare you ask
me, of all men in the world, to mix myself up in this horror?  i should
have thought you knew more about people's characters.  your friend lord
henry wotton can't have taught you much about psychology, whatever else
he has taught you.  nothing will induce me to stir a step to help you.
you have come to the wrong man.  go to some of your friends.  don't
come to me."

"alan, it was murder.  i killed him.  you don't know what he had made
me suffer.  whatever my life is, he had more to do with the making or
the marring of it than poor harry has had.  he may not have intended
it, the result was the same."

"murder!  good god, dorian, is that what you have come to?  i shall not
inform upon you.  it is not my business.  besides, without my stirring
in the matter, you are certain to be arrested.  nobody ever commits a
crime without doing something stupid.  but i will have nothing to do
with it."

"you must have something to do with it.  wait, wait a moment; listen to
me.  only listen, alan.  all i ask of you is to perform a certain
scientific experiment.  you go to hospitals and dead-houses, and the
horrors that you do there don't affect you.  if in some hideous
dissecting-room or fetid laboratory you found this man lying on a
leaden table with red gutters scooped out in it for the blood to flow
through, you would simply look upon him as an admirable subject.  you
would not turn a hair.  you would not believe that you were doing
anything wrong.  on the contrary, you would probably feel that you were
benefiting the human race, or increasing the sum of knowledge in the
world, or gratifying intellectual curiosity, or something of that kind.
what i want you to do is merely what you have often done before.
indeed, to destroy a body must be far less horrible than what you are
accustomed to work at.  and, remember, it is the only piece of evidence
against me.  if it is discovered, i am lost; and it is sure to be
discovered unless you help me."

"i have no desire to help you.  you forget that.  i am simply
indifferent to the whole thing.  it has nothing to do with me."

"alan, i entreat you.  think of the position i am in.  just before you
came i almost fainted with terror.  you may know terror yourself some
day.  no! don't think of that.  look at the matter purely from the
scientific point of view.  you don't inquire where the dead things on
which you experiment come from.  don't inquire now.  i have told you
too much as it is.  but i beg of you to do this.  we were friends once,
alan."

"don't speak about those days, dorian--they are dead."

"the dead linger sometimes.  the man upstairs will not go away.  he is
sitting at the table with bowed head and outstretched arms.  alan!
alan!  if you don't come to my assistance, i am ruined.  why, they will
hang me, alan!  don't you understand?  they will hang me for what i
have done."

"there is no good in prolonging this scene.  i absolutely refuse to do
anything in the matter.  it is insane of you to ask me."

"you refuse?"

"yes."

"i entreat you, alan."

"it is useless."

the same look of pity came into dorian gray's eyes.  then he stretched
out his hand, took a piece of paper, and wrote something on it.  he
read it over twice, folded it carefully, and pushed it across the
table.  having done this, he got up and went over to the window.

campbell looked at him in surprise, and then took up the paper, and
opened it.  as he read it, his face became ghastly pale and he fell
back in his chair.  a horrible sense of sickness came over him.  he
felt as if his heart was beating itself to death in some empty hollow.

after two or three minutes of terrible silence, dorian turned round and
came and stood behind him, putting his hand upon his shoulder.

"i am so sorry for you, alan," he murmured, "but you leave me no
alternative.  i have a letter written already.  here it is.  you see
the address.  if you don't help me, i must send it.  if you don't help
me, i will send it.  you know what the result will be.  but you are
going to help me.  it is impossible for you to refuse now.  i tried to
spare you.  you will do me the justice to admit that.  you were stern,
harsh, offensive.  you treated me as no man has ever dared to treat
me--no living man, at any rate.  i bore it all.  now it is for me to
dictate terms."

campbell buried his face in his hands, and a shudder passed through him.

"yes, it is my turn to dictate terms, alan.  you know what they are.
the thing is quite simple.  come, don't work yourself into this fever.
the thing has to be done.  face it, and do it."

a groan broke from campbell's lips and he shivered all over.  the
ticking of the clock on the mantelpiece seemed to him to be dividing
time into separate atoms of agony, each of which was too terrible to be
borne.  he felt as if an iron ring was being slowly tightened round his
forehead, as if the disgrace with which he was threatened had already
come upon him.  the hand upon his shoulder weighed like a hand of lead.
it was intolerable.  it seemed to crush him.

"come, alan, you must decide at once."

"i cannot do it," he said, mechanically, as though words could alter
things.

"you must.  you have no choice.  don't delay."

he hesitated a moment.  "is there a fire in the room upstairs?"

"yes, there is a gas-fire with asbestos."

"i shall have to go home and get some things from the laboratory."

"no, alan, you must not leave the house.  write out on a sheet of
notepaper what you want and my servant will take a cab and bring the
things back to you."

campbell scrawled a few lines, blotted them, and addressed an envelope
to his assistant.  dorian took the note up and read it carefully.  then
he rang the bell and gave it to his valet, with orders to return as
soon as possible and to bring the things with him.

as the hall door shut, campbell started nervously, and having got up
from the chair, went over to the chimney-piece. he was shivering with a
kind of ague.  for nearly twenty minutes, neither of the men spoke.  a
fly buzzed noisily about the room, and the ticking of the clock was
like the beat of a hammer.

as the chime struck one, campbell turned round, and looking at dorian
gray, saw that his eyes were filled with tears.  there was something in
the purity and refinement of that sad face that seemed to enrage him.
"you are infamous, absolutely infamous!" he muttered.

"hush, alan.  you have saved my life," said dorian.

"your life?  good heavens! what a life that is!  you have gone from
corruption to corruption, and now you have culminated in crime.  in
doing what i am going to do--what you force me to do--it is not of your
life that i am thinking."

"ah, alan," murmured dorian with a sigh, "i wish you had a thousandth
part of the pity for me that i have for you." he turned away as he
spoke and stood looking out at the garden.  campbell made no answer.

after about ten minutes a knock came to the door, and the servant
entered, carrying a large mahogany chest of chemicals, with a long coil
of steel and platinum wire and two rather curiously shaped iron clamps.

"shall i leave the things here, sir?" he asked campbell.

"yes," said dorian.  "and i am afraid, francis, that i have another
errand for you.  what is the name of the man at richmond who supplies
selby with orchids?"

"harden, sir."

"yes--harden.  you must go down to richmond at once, see harden
personally, and tell him to send twice as many orchids as i ordered,
and to have as few white ones as possible.  in fact, i don't want any
white ones.  it is a lovely day, francis, and richmond is a very pretty
place--otherwise i wouldn't bother you about it."

"no trouble, sir.  at what time shall i be back?"

dorian looked at campbell.  "how long will your experiment take, alan?"
he said in a calm indifferent voice.  the presence of a third person in
the room seemed to give him extraordinary courage.

campbell frowned and bit his lip.  "it will take about five hours," he
answered.

"it will be time enough, then, if you are back at half-past seven,
francis.  or stay:  just leave my things out for dressing.  you can
have the evening to yourself.  i am not dining at home, so i shall not
want you."

"thank you, sir," said the man, leaving the room.

"now, alan, there is not a moment to be lost.  how heavy this chest is!
i'll take it for you.  you bring the other things."  he spoke rapidly
and in an authoritative manner.  campbell felt dominated by him.  they
left the room together.

when they reached the top landing, dorian took out the key and turned
it in the lock.  then he stopped, and a troubled look came into his
eyes.  he shuddered.  "i don't think i can go in, alan," he murmured.

"it is nothing to me.  i don't require you," said campbell coldly.

dorian half opened the door.  as he did so, he saw the face of his
portrait leering in the sunlight.  on the floor in front of it the torn
curtain was lying.  he remembered that the night before he had
forgotten, for the first time in his life, to hide the fatal canvas,
and was about to rush forward, when he drew back with a shudder.

what was that loathsome red dew that gleamed, wet and glistening, on
one of the hands, as though the canvas had sweated blood?  how horrible
it was!--more horrible, it seemed to him for the moment, than the
silent thing that he knew was stretched across the table, the thing
whose grotesque misshapen shadow on the spotted carpet showed him that
it had not stirred, but was still there, as he had left it.

he heaved a deep breath, opened the door a little wider, and with
half-closed eyes and averted head, walked quickly in, determined that
he would not look even once upon the dead man.  then, stooping down and
taking up the gold-and-purple hanging, he flung it right over the
picture.

there he stopped, feeling afraid to turn round, and his eyes fixed
themselves on the intricacies of the pattern before him.  he heard
campbell bringing in the heavy chest, and the irons, and the other
things that he had required for his dreadful work.  he began to wonder
if he and basil hallward had ever met, and, if so, what they had
thought of each other.

"leave me now," said a stern voice behind him.

he turned and hurried out, just conscious that the dead man had been
thrust back into the chair and that campbell was gazing into a
glistening yellow face.  as he was going downstairs, he heard the key
being turned in the lock.

it was long after seven when campbell came back into the library.  he
was pale, but absolutely calm.  "i have done what you asked me to do,"
he muttered. "and now, good-bye. let us never see each other again."

"you have saved me from ruin, alan.  i cannot forget that," said dorian
simply.

as soon as campbell had left, he went upstairs.  there was a horrible
smell of nitric acid in the room.  but the thing that had been sitting
at the table was gone.



chapter 15

that evening, at eight-thirty, exquisitely dressed and wearing a large
button-hole of parma violets, dorian gray was ushered into lady
narborough's drawing-room by bowing servants.  his forehead was
throbbing with maddened nerves, and he felt wildly excited, but his
manner as he bent over his hostess's hand was as easy and graceful as
ever.  perhaps one never seems so much at one's ease as when one has to
play a part.  certainly no one looking at dorian gray that night could
have believed that he had passed through a tragedy as horrible as any
tragedy of our age.  those finely shaped fingers could never have
clutched a knife for sin, nor those smiling lips have cried out on god
and goodness.  he himself could not help wondering at the calm of his
demeanour, and for a moment felt keenly the terrible pleasure of a
double life.

it was a small party, got up rather in a hurry by lady narborough, who
was a very clever woman with what lord henry used to describe as the
remains of really remarkable ugliness.  she had proved an excellent
wife to one of our most tedious ambassadors, and having buried her
husband properly in a marble mausoleum, which she had herself designed,
and married off her daughters to some rich, rather elderly men, she
devoted herself now to the pleasures of french fiction, french cookery,
and french _esprit_ when she could get it.

dorian was one of her especial favourites, and she always told him that
she was extremely glad she had not met him in early life.  "i know, my
dear, i should have fallen madly in love with you," she used to say,
"and thrown my bonnet right over the mills for your sake.  it is most
fortunate that you were not thought of at the time.  as it was, our
bonnets were so unbecoming, and the mills were so occupied in trying to
raise the wind, that i never had even a flirtation with anybody.
however, that was all narborough's fault.  he was dreadfully
short-sighted, and there is no pleasure in taking in a husband who
never sees anything."

her guests this evening were rather tedious.  the fact was, as she
explained to dorian, behind a very shabby fan, one of her married
daughters had come up quite suddenly to stay with her, and, to make
matters worse, had actually brought her husband with her.  "i think it
is most unkind of her, my dear," she whispered.  "of course i go and
stay with them every summer after i come from homburg, but then an old
woman like me must have fresh air sometimes, and besides, i really wake
them up.  you don't know what an existence they lead down there.  it is
pure unadulterated country life.  they get up early, because they have
so much to do, and go to bed early, because they have so little to
think about.  there has not been a scandal in the neighbourhood since
the time of queen elizabeth, and consequently they all fall asleep
after dinner.  you shan't sit next either of them.  you shall sit by me
and amuse me."

dorian murmured a graceful compliment and looked round the room.  yes:
it was certainly a tedious party.  two of the people he had never seen
before, and the others consisted of ernest harrowden, one of those
middle-aged mediocrities so common in london clubs who have no enemies,
but are thoroughly disliked by their friends; lady ruxton, an
overdressed woman of forty-seven, with a hooked nose, who was always
trying to get herself compromised, but was so peculiarly plain that to
her great disappointment no one would ever believe anything against
her; mrs. erlynne, a pushing nobody, with a delightful lisp and
venetian-red hair; lady alice chapman, his hostess's daughter, a dowdy
dull girl, with one of those characteristic british faces that, once
seen, are never remembered; and her husband, a red-cheeked,
white-whiskered creature who, like so many of his class, was under the
impression that inordinate joviality can atone for an entire lack of
ideas.

he was rather sorry he had come, till lady narborough, looking at the
great ormolu gilt clock that sprawled in gaudy curves on the
mauve-draped mantelshelf, exclaimed:  "how horrid of henry wotton to be
so late!  i sent round to him this morning on chance and he promised
faithfully not to disappoint me."

it was some consolation that harry was to be there, and when the door
opened and he heard his slow musical voice lending charm to some
insincere apology, he ceased to feel bored.

but at dinner he could not eat anything.  plate after plate went away
untasted.  lady narborough kept scolding him for what she called "an
insult to poor adolphe, who invented the _menu_ specially for you," and
now and then lord henry looked across at him, wondering at his silence
and abstracted manner.  from time to time the butler filled his glass
with champagne.  he drank eagerly, and his thirst seemed to increase.

"dorian," said lord henry at last, as the _chaud-froid_ was being handed
round, "what is the matter with you to-night? you are quite out of
sorts."

"i believe he is in love," cried lady narborough, "and that he is
afraid to tell me for fear i should be jealous.  he is quite right.  i
certainly should."

"dear lady narborough," murmured dorian, smiling, "i have not been in
love for a whole week--not, in fact, since madame de ferrol left town."

"how you men can fall in love with that woman!" exclaimed the old lady.
"i really cannot understand it."

"it is simply because she remembers you when you were a little girl,
lady narborough," said lord henry.  "she is the one link between us and
your short frocks."

"she does not remember my short frocks at all, lord henry.  but i
remember her very well at vienna thirty years ago, and how _decolletee_
she was then."

"she is still _decolletee_," he answered, taking an olive in his long
fingers; "and when she is in a very smart gown she looks like an
_edition de luxe_ of a bad french novel.  she is really wonderful, and
full of surprises.  her capacity for family affection is extraordinary.
when her third husband died, her hair turned quite gold from grief."

"how can you, harry!" cried dorian.

"it is a most romantic explanation," laughed the hostess.  "but her
third husband, lord henry!  you don't mean to say ferrol is the fourth?"

"certainly, lady narborough."

"i don't believe a word of it."

"well, ask mr. gray.  he is one of her most intimate friends."

"is it true, mr. gray?"

"she assures me so, lady narborough," said dorian.  "i asked her
whether, like marguerite de navarre, she had their hearts embalmed and
hung at her girdle.  she told me she didn't, because none of them had
had any hearts at all."

"four husbands!  upon my word that is _trop de zele_."

"_trop d'audace_, i tell her," said dorian.

"oh! she is audacious enough for anything, my dear.  and what is ferrol
like?  i don't know him."

"the husbands of very beautiful women belong to the criminal classes,"
said lord henry, sipping his wine.

lady narborough hit him with her fan.  "lord henry, i am not at all
surprised that the world says that you are extremely wicked."

"but what world says that?" asked lord henry, elevating his eyebrows.
"it can only be the next world.  this world and i are on excellent
terms."

"everybody i know says you are very wicked," cried the old lady,
shaking her head.

lord henry looked serious for some moments.  "it is perfectly
monstrous," he said, at last, "the way people go about nowadays saying
things against one behind one's back that are absolutely and entirely
true."

"isn't he incorrigible?" cried dorian, leaning forward in his chair.

"i hope so," said his hostess, laughing.  "but really, if you all
worship madame de ferrol in this ridiculous way, i shall have to marry
again so as to be in the fashion."

"you will never marry again, lady narborough," broke in lord henry.
"you were far too happy.  when a woman marries again, it is because she
detested her first husband.  when a man marries again, it is because he
adored his first wife.  women try their luck; men risk theirs."

"narborough wasn't perfect," cried the old lady.

"if he had been, you would not have loved him, my dear lady," was the
rejoinder.  "women love us for our defects.  if we have enough of them,
they will forgive us everything, even our intellects.  you will never
ask me to dinner again after saying this, i am afraid, lady narborough,
but it is quite true."

"of course it is true, lord henry.  if we women did not love you for
your defects, where would you all be?  not one of you would ever be
married.  you would be a set of unfortunate bachelors.  not, however,
that that would alter you much.  nowadays all the married men live like
bachelors, and all the bachelors like married men."

"_fin de siecle_," murmured lord henry.

"_fin du globe_," answered his hostess.

"i wish it were _fin du globe_," said dorian with a sigh.  "life is a
great disappointment."

"ah, my dear," cried lady narborough, putting on her gloves, "don't
tell me that you have exhausted life.  when a man says that one knows
that life has exhausted him.  lord henry is very wicked, and i
sometimes wish that i had been; but you are made to be good--you look
so good.  i must find you a nice wife.  lord henry, don't you think
that mr. gray should get married?"

"i am always telling him so, lady narborough," said lord henry with a
bow.

"well, we must look out for a suitable match for him.  i shall go
through debrett carefully to-night and draw out a list of all the
eligible young ladies."

"with their ages, lady narborough?" asked dorian.

"of course, with their ages, slightly edited.  but nothing must be done
in a hurry.  i want it to be what _the morning post_ calls a suitable
alliance, and i want you both to be happy."

"what nonsense people talk about happy marriages!" exclaimed lord
henry.  "a man can be happy with any woman, as long as he does not love
her."

"ah! what a cynic you are!" cried the old lady, pushing back her chair
and nodding to lady ruxton.  "you must come and dine with me soon
again.  you are really an admirable tonic, much better than what sir
andrew prescribes for me.  you must tell me what people you would like
to meet, though.  i want it to be a delightful gathering."

"i like men who have a future and women who have a past," he answered.
"or do you think that would make it a petticoat party?"

"i fear so," she said, laughing, as she stood up.  "a thousand pardons,
my dear lady ruxton," she added, "i didn't see you hadn't finished your
cigarette."

"never mind, lady narborough.  i smoke a great deal too much.  i am
going to limit myself, for the future."

"pray don't, lady ruxton," said lord henry.  "moderation is a fatal
thing.  enough is as bad as a meal.  more than enough is as good as a
feast."

lady ruxton glanced at him curiously.  "you must come and explain that
to me some afternoon, lord henry.  it sounds a fascinating theory," she
murmured, as she swept out of the room.

"now, mind you don't stay too long over your politics and scandal,"
cried lady narborough from the door.  "if you do, we are sure to
squabble upstairs."

the men laughed, and mr. chapman got up solemnly from the foot of the
table and came up to the top.  dorian gray changed his seat and went
and sat by lord henry.  mr. chapman began to talk in a loud voice about
the situation in the house of commons.  he guffawed at his adversaries.
the word _doctrinaire_--word full of terror to the british
mind--reappeared from time to time between his explosions.  an
alliterative prefix served as an ornament of oratory.  he hoisted the
union jack on the pinnacles of thought.  the inherited stupidity of the
race--sound english common sense he jovially termed it--was shown to be
the proper bulwark for society.

a smile curved lord henry's lips, and he turned round and looked at
dorian.

"are you better, my dear fellow?" he asked.  "you seemed rather out of
sorts at dinner."

"i am quite well, harry.  i am tired.  that is all."

"you were charming last night.  the little duchess is quite devoted to
you.  she tells me she is going down to selby."

"she has promised to come on the twentieth."

"is monmouth to be there, too?"

"oh, yes, harry."

"he bores me dreadfully, almost as much as he bores her.  she is very
clever, too clever for a woman.  she lacks the indefinable charm of
weakness.  it is the feet of clay that make the gold of the image
precious.  her feet are very pretty, but they are not feet of clay.
white porcelain feet, if you like.  they have been through the fire,
and what fire does not destroy, it hardens.  she has had experiences."

"how long has she been married?" asked dorian.

"an eternity, she tells me.  i believe, according to the peerage, it is
ten years, but ten years with monmouth must have been like eternity,
with time thrown in.  who else is coming?"

"oh, the willoughbys, lord rugby and his wife, our hostess, geoffrey
clouston, the usual set.  i have asked lord grotrian."

"i like him," said lord henry.  "a great many people don't, but i find
him charming.  he atones for being occasionally somewhat overdressed by
being always absolutely over-educated. he is a very modern type."

"i don't know if he will be able to come, harry.  he may have to go to
monte carlo with his father."

"ah! what a nuisance people's people are!  try and make him come.  by
the way, dorian, you ran off very early last night.  you left before
eleven.  what did you do afterwards?  did you go straight home?"

dorian glanced at him hurriedly and frowned.

"no, harry," he said at last, "i did not get home till nearly three."

"did you go to the club?"

"yes," he answered.  then he bit his lip.  "no, i don't mean that.  i
didn't go to the club.  i walked about.  i forget what i did.... how
inquisitive you are, harry!  you always want to know what one has been
doing.  i always want to forget what i have been doing.  i came in at
half-past two, if you wish to know the exact time.  i had left my
latch-key at home, and my servant had to let me in.  if you want any
corroborative evidence on the subject, you can ask him."

lord henry shrugged his shoulders.  "my dear fellow, as if i cared!
let us go up to the drawing-room. no sherry, thank you, mr. chapman.
something has happened to you, dorian.  tell me what it is.  you are
not yourself to-night."

"don't mind me, harry.  i am irritable, and out of temper.  i shall
come round and see you to-morrow, or next day.  make my excuses to lady
narborough.  i shan't go upstairs.  i shall go home.  i must go home."

"all right, dorian.  i dare say i shall see you to-morrow at tea-time.
the duchess is coming."

"i will try to be there, harry," he said, leaving the room.  as he
drove back to his own house, he was conscious that the sense of terror
he thought he had strangled had come back to him.  lord henry's casual
questioning had made him lose his nerve for the moment, and he wanted
his nerve still.  things that were dangerous had to be destroyed.  he
winced.  he hated the idea of even touching them.

yet it had to be done.  he realized that, and when he had locked the
door of his library, he opened the secret press into which he had
thrust basil hallward's coat and bag.  a huge fire was blazing.  he
piled another log on it.  the smell of the singeing clothes and burning
leather was horrible.  it took him three-quarters of an hour to consume
everything.  at the end he felt faint and sick, and having lit some
algerian pastilles in a pierced copper brazier, he bathed his hands and
forehead with a cool musk-scented vinegar.

suddenly he started.  his eyes grew strangely bright, and he gnawed
nervously at his underlip.  between two of the windows stood a large
florentine cabinet, made out of ebony and inlaid with ivory and blue
lapis.  he watched it as though it were a thing that could fascinate
and make afraid, as though it held something that he longed for and yet
almost loathed.  his breath quickened.  a mad craving came over him.
he lit a cigarette and then threw it away.  his eyelids drooped till
the long fringed lashes almost touched his cheek.  but he still watched
the cabinet.  at last he got up from the sofa on which he had been
lying, went over to it, and having unlocked it, touched some hidden
spring.  a triangular drawer passed slowly out.  his fingers moved
instinctively towards it, dipped in, and closed on something.  it was a
small chinese box of black and gold-dust lacquer, elaborately wrought,
the sides patterned with curved waves, and the silken cords hung with
round crystals and tasselled in plaited metal threads.  he opened it.
inside was a green paste, waxy in lustre, the odour curiously heavy and
persistent.

he hesitated for some moments, with a strangely immobile smile upon his
face.  then shivering, though the atmosphere of the room was terribly
hot, he drew himself up and glanced at the clock.  it was twenty
minutes to twelve.  he put the box back, shutting the cabinet doors as
he did so, and went into his bedroom.

as midnight was striking bronze blows upon the dusky air, dorian gray,
dressed commonly, and with a muffler wrapped round his throat, crept
quietly out of his house.  in bond street he found a hansom with a good
horse.  he hailed it and in a low voice gave the driver an address.

the man shook his head.  "it is too far for me," he muttered.

"here is a sovereign for you," said dorian.  "you shall have another if
you drive fast."

"all right, sir," answered the man, "you will be there in an hour," and
after his fare had got in he turned his horse round and drove rapidly
towards the river.



chapter 16

a cold rain began to fall, and the blurred street-lamps looked ghastly
in the dripping mist.  the public-houses were just closing, and dim men
and women were clustering in broken groups round their doors.  from
some of the bars came the sound of horrible laughter.  in others,
drunkards brawled and screamed.

lying back in the hansom, with his hat pulled over his forehead, dorian
gray watched with listless eyes the sordid shame of the great city, and
now and then he repeated to himself the words that lord henry had said
to him on the first day they had met, "to cure the soul by means of the
senses, and the senses by means of the soul."  yes, that was the
secret.  he had often tried it, and would try it again now.  there were
opium dens where one could buy oblivion, dens of horror where the
memory of old sins could be destroyed by the madness of sins that were
new.

the moon hung low in the sky like a yellow skull.  from time to time a
huge misshapen cloud stretched a long arm across and hid it.  the
gas-lamps grew fewer, and the streets more narrow and gloomy.  once the
man lost his way and had to drive back half a mile.  a steam rose from
the horse as it splashed up the puddles.  the sidewindows of the hansom
were clogged with a grey-flannel mist.

"to cure the soul by means of the senses, and the senses by means of
the soul!"  how the words rang in his ears!  his soul, certainly, was
sick to death.  was it true that the senses could cure it?  innocent
blood had been spilled.  what could atone for that?  ah! for that there
was no atonement; but though forgiveness was impossible, forgetfulness
was possible still, and he was determined to forget, to stamp the thing
out, to crush it as one would crush the adder that had stung one.
indeed, what right had basil to have spoken to him as he had done?  who
had made him a judge over others?  he had said things that were
dreadful, horrible, not to be endured.

on and on plodded the hansom, going slower, it seemed to him, at each
step.  he thrust up the trap and called to the man to drive faster.
the hideous hunger for opium began to gnaw at him.  his throat burned
and his delicate hands twitched nervously together.  he struck at the
horse madly with his stick.  the driver laughed and whipped up.  he
laughed in answer, and the man was silent.

the way seemed interminable, and the streets like the black web of some
sprawling spider.  the monotony became unbearable, and as the mist
thickened, he felt afraid.

then they passed by lonely brickfields.  the fog was lighter here, and
he could see the strange, bottle-shaped kilns with their orange,
fanlike tongues of fire.  a dog barked as they went by, and far away in
the darkness some wandering sea-gull screamed.  the horse stumbled in a
rut, then swerved aside and broke into a gallop.

after some time they left the clay road and rattled again over
rough-paven streets.  most of the windows were dark, but now and then
fantastic shadows were silhouetted against some lamplit blind.  he
watched them curiously.  they moved like monstrous marionettes and made
gestures like live things.  he hated them.  a dull rage was in his
heart.  as they turned a corner, a woman yelled something at them from
an open door, and two men ran after the hansom for about a hundred
yards.  the driver beat at them with his whip.

it is said that passion makes one think in a circle.  certainly with
hideous iteration the bitten lips of dorian gray shaped and reshaped
those subtle words that dealt with soul and sense, till he had found in
them the full expression, as it were, of his mood, and justified, by
intellectual approval, passions that without such justification would
still have dominated his temper.  from cell to cell of his brain crept
the one thought; and the wild desire to live, most terrible of all
man's appetites, quickened into force each trembling nerve and fibre.
ugliness that had once been hateful to him because it made things real,
became dear to him now for that very reason.  ugliness was the one
reality.  the coarse brawl, the loathsome den, the crude violence of
disordered life, the very vileness of thief and outcast, were more
vivid, in their intense actuality of impression, than all the gracious
shapes of art, the dreamy shadows of song.  they were what he needed
for forgetfulness.  in three days he would be free.

suddenly the man drew up with a jerk at the top of a dark lane.  over
the low roofs and jagged chimney-stacks of the houses rose the black
masts of ships.  wreaths of white mist clung like ghostly sails to the
yards.

"somewhere about here, sir, ain't it?" he asked huskily through the
trap.

dorian started and peered round.  "this will do," he answered, and
having got out hastily and given the driver the extra fare he had
promised him, he walked quickly in the direction of the quay.  here and
there a lantern gleamed at the stern of some huge merchantman.  the
light shook and splintered in the puddles.  a red glare came from an
outward-bound steamer that was coaling.  the slimy pavement looked like
a wet mackintosh.

he hurried on towards the left, glancing back now and then to see if he
was being followed.  in about seven or eight minutes he reached a small
shabby house that was wedged in between two gaunt factories.  in one of
the top-windows stood a lamp.  he stopped and gave a peculiar knock.

after a little time he heard steps in the passage and the chain being
unhooked.  the door opened quietly, and he went in without saying a
word to the squat misshapen figure that flattened itself into the
shadow as he passed.  at the end of the hall hung a tattered green
curtain that swayed and shook in the gusty wind which had followed him
in from the street.  he dragged it aside and entered a long low room
which looked as if it had once been a third-rate dancing-saloon. shrill
flaring gas-jets, dulled and distorted in the fly-blown mirrors that
faced them, were ranged round the walls.  greasy reflectors of ribbed
tin backed them, making quivering disks of light.  the floor was
covered with ochre-coloured sawdust, trampled here and there into mud,
and stained with dark rings of spilled liquor.  some malays were
crouching by a little charcoal stove, playing with bone counters and
showing their white teeth as they chattered.  in one corner, with his
head buried in his arms, a sailor sprawled over a table, and by the
tawdrily painted bar that ran across one complete side stood two
haggard women, mocking an old man who was brushing the sleeves of his
coat with an expression of disgust.  "he thinks he's got red ants on
him," laughed one of them, as dorian passed by.  the man looked at her
in terror and began to whimper.

at the end of the room there was a little staircase, leading to a
darkened chamber.  as dorian hurried up its three rickety steps, the
heavy odour of opium met him.  he heaved a deep breath, and his
nostrils quivered with pleasure.  when he entered, a young man with
smooth yellow hair, who was bending over a lamp lighting a long thin
pipe, looked up at him and nodded in a hesitating manner.

"you here, adrian?" muttered dorian.

"where else should i be?" he answered, listlessly.  "none of the chaps
will speak to me now."

"i thought you had left england."

"darlington is not going to do anything.  my brother paid the bill at
last.  george doesn't speak to me either.... i don't care," he added
with a sigh.  "as long as one has this stuff, one doesn't want friends.
i think i have had too many friends."

dorian winced and looked round at the grotesque things that lay in such
fantastic postures on the ragged mattresses.  the twisted limbs, the
gaping mouths, the staring lustreless eyes, fascinated him.  he knew in
what strange heavens they were suffering, and what dull hells were
teaching them the secret of some new joy.  they were better off than he
was.  he was prisoned in thought.  memory, like a horrible malady, was
eating his soul away.  from time to time he seemed to see the eyes of
basil hallward looking at him.  yet he felt he could not stay.  the
presence of adrian singleton troubled him.  he wanted to be where no
one would know who he was.  he wanted to escape from himself.

"i am going on to the other place," he said after a pause.

"on the wharf?"

"yes."

"that mad-cat is sure to be there.  they won't have her in this place
now."

dorian shrugged his shoulders.  "i am sick of women who love one.
women who hate one are much more interesting.  besides, the stuff is
better."

"much the same."

"i like it better.  come and have something to drink.  i must have
something."

"i don't want anything," murmured the young man.

"never mind."

adrian singleton rose up wearily and followed dorian to the bar.  a
half-caste, in a ragged turban and a shabby ulster, grinned a hideous
greeting as he thrust a bottle of brandy and two tumblers in front of
them.  the women sidled up and began to chatter.  dorian turned his
back on them and said something in a low voice to adrian singleton.

a crooked smile, like a malay crease, writhed across the face of one of
the women.  "we are very proud to-night," she sneered.

"for god's sake don't talk to me," cried dorian, stamping his foot on
the ground.  "what do you want?  money?  here it is.  don't ever talk
to me again."

two red sparks flashed for a moment in the woman's sodden eyes, then
flickered out and left them dull and glazed.  she tossed her head and
raked the coins off the counter with greedy fingers.  her companion
watched her enviously.

"it's no use," sighed adrian singleton.  "i don't care to go back.
what does it matter?  i am quite happy here."

"you will write to me if you want anything, won't you?" said dorian,
after a pause.

"perhaps."

"good night, then."

"good night," answered the young man, passing up the steps and wiping
his parched mouth with a handkerchief.

dorian walked to the door with a look of pain in his face.  as he drew
the curtain aside, a hideous laugh broke from the painted lips of the
woman who had taken his money.  "there goes the devil's bargain!" she
hiccoughed, in a hoarse voice.

"curse you!" he answered, "don't call me that."

she snapped her fingers.  "prince charming is what you like to be
called, ain't it?" she yelled after him.

the drowsy sailor leaped to his feet as she spoke, and looked wildly
round.  the sound of the shutting of the hall door fell on his ear.  he
rushed out as if in pursuit.

dorian gray hurried along the quay through the drizzling rain.  his
meeting with adrian singleton had strangely moved him, and he wondered
if the ruin of that young life was really to be laid at his door, as
basil hallward had said to him with such infamy of insult.  he bit his
lip, and for a few seconds his eyes grew sad.  yet, after all, what did
it matter to him?  one's days were too brief to take the burden of
another's errors on one's shoulders.  each man lived his own life and
paid his own price for living it.  the only pity was one had to pay so
often for a single fault.  one had to pay over and over again, indeed.
in her dealings with man, destiny never closed her accounts.

there are moments, psychologists tell us, when the passion for sin, or
for what the world calls sin, so dominates a nature that every fibre of
the body, as every cell of the brain, seems to be instinct with fearful
impulses.  men and women at such moments lose the freedom of their
will.  they move to their terrible end as automatons move.  choice is
taken from them, and conscience is either killed, or, if it lives at
all, lives but to give rebellion its fascination and disobedience its
charm.  for all sins, as theologians weary not of reminding us, are
sins of disobedience.  when that high spirit, that morning star of
evil, fell from heaven, it was as a rebel that he fell.

callous, concentrated on evil, with stained mind, and soul hungry for
rebellion, dorian gray hastened on, quickening his step as he went, but
as he darted aside into a dim archway, that had served him often as a
short cut to the ill-famed place where he was going, he felt himself
suddenly seized from behind, and before he had time to defend himself,
he was thrust back against the wall, with a brutal hand round his
throat.

he struggled madly for life, and by a terrible effort wrenched the
tightening fingers away.  in a second he heard the click of a revolver,
and saw the gleam of a polished barrel, pointing straight at his head,
and the dusky form of a short, thick-set man facing him.

"what do you want?" he gasped.

"keep quiet," said the man.  "if you stir, i shoot you."

"you are mad.  what have i done to you?"

"you wrecked the life of sibyl vane," was the answer, "and sibyl vane
was my sister.  she killed herself.  i know it.  her death is at your
door.  i swore i would kill you in return.  for years i have sought
you.  i had no clue, no trace.  the two people who could have described
you were dead.  i knew nothing of you but the pet name she used to call
you.  i heard it to-night by chance.  make your peace with god, for
to-night you are going to die."

dorian gray grew sick with fear.  "i never knew her," he stammered.  "i
never heard of her.  you are mad."

"you had better confess your sin, for as sure as i am james vane, you
are going to die."  there was a horrible moment.  dorian did not know
what to say or do.  "down on your knees!" growled the man.  "i give you
one minute to make your peace--no more.  i go on board to-night for
india, and i must do my job first.  one minute.  that's all."

dorian's arms fell to his side.  paralysed with terror, he did not know
what to do.  suddenly a wild hope flashed across his brain.  "stop," he
cried.  "how long ago is it since your sister died?  quick, tell me!"

"eighteen years," said the man.  "why do you ask me?  what do years
matter?"

"eighteen years," laughed dorian gray, with a touch of triumph in his
voice.  "eighteen years!  set me under the lamp and look at my face!"

james vane hesitated for a moment, not understanding what was meant.
then he seized dorian gray and dragged him from the archway.

dim and wavering as was the wind-blown light, yet it served to show him
the hideous error, as it seemed, into which he had fallen, for the face
of the man he had sought to kill had all the bloom of boyhood, all the
unstained purity of youth.  he seemed little more than a lad of twenty
summers, hardly older, if older indeed at all, than his sister had been
when they had parted so many years ago.  it was obvious that this was
not the man who had destroyed her life.

he loosened his hold and reeled back.  "my god! my god!" he cried, "and
i would have murdered you!"

dorian gray drew a long breath.  "you have been on the brink of
committing a terrible crime, my man," he said, looking at him sternly.
"let this be a warning to you not to take vengeance into your own
hands."

"forgive me, sir," muttered james vane.  "i was deceived.  a chance
word i heard in that damned den set me on the wrong track."

"you had better go home and put that pistol away, or you may get into
trouble," said dorian, turning on his heel and going slowly down the
street.

james vane stood on the pavement in horror.  he was trembling from head
to foot.  after a little while, a black shadow that had been creeping
along the dripping wall moved out into the light and came close to him
with stealthy footsteps.  he felt a hand laid on his arm and looked
round with a start.  it was one of the women who had been drinking at
the bar.

"why didn't you kill him?" she hissed out, putting haggard face quite
close to his.  "i knew you were following him when you rushed out from
daly's. you fool!  you should have killed him.  he has lots of money,
and he's as bad as bad."

"he is not the man i am looking for," he answered, "and i want no man's
money.  i want a man's life.  the man whose life i want must be nearly
forty now.  this one is little more than a boy.  thank god, i have not
got his blood upon my hands."

the woman gave a bitter laugh.  "little more than a boy!" she sneered.
"why, man, it's nigh on eighteen years since prince charming made me
what i am."

"you lie!" cried james vane.

she raised her hand up to heaven.  "before god i am telling the truth,"
she cried.

"before god?"

"strike me dumb if it ain't so.  he is the worst one that comes here.
they say he has sold himself to the devil for a pretty face.  it's nigh
on eighteen years since i met him.  he hasn't changed much since then.
i have, though," she added, with a sickly leer.

"you swear this?"

"i swear it," came in hoarse echo from her flat mouth.  "but don't give
me away to him," she whined; "i am afraid of him.  let me have some
money for my night's lodging."

he broke from her with an oath and rushed to the corner of the street,
but dorian gray had disappeared.  when he looked back, the woman had
vanished also.



chapter 17

a week later dorian gray was sitting in the conservatory at selby
royal, talking to the pretty duchess of monmouth, who with her husband,
a jaded-looking man of sixty, was amongst his guests.  it was tea-time,
and the mellow light of the huge, lace-covered lamp that stood on the
table lit up the delicate china and hammered silver of the service at
which the duchess was presiding.  her white hands were moving daintily
among the cups, and her full red lips were smiling at something that
dorian had whispered to her.  lord henry was lying back in a
silk-draped wicker chair, looking at them.  on a peach-coloured divan
sat lady narborough, pretending to listen to the duke's description of
the last brazilian beetle that he had added to his collection.  three
young men in elaborate smoking-suits were handing tea-cakes to some of
the women.  the house-party consisted of twelve people, and there were
more expected to arrive on the next day.

"what are you two talking about?" said lord henry, strolling over to
the table and putting his cup down.  "i hope dorian has told you about
my plan for rechristening everything, gladys.  it is a delightful idea."

"but i don't want to be rechristened, harry," rejoined the duchess,
looking up at him with her wonderful eyes.  "i am quite satisfied with
my own name, and i am sure mr. gray should be satisfied with his."

"my dear gladys, i would not alter either name for the world.  they are
both perfect.  i was thinking chiefly of flowers.  yesterday i cut an
orchid, for my button-hole. it was a marvellous spotted thing, as
effective as the seven deadly sins.  in a thoughtless moment i asked
one of the gardeners what it was called.  he told me it was a fine
specimen of _robinsoniana_, or something dreadful of that kind.  it is a
sad truth, but we have lost the faculty of giving lovely names to
things.  names are everything.  i never quarrel with actions.  my one
quarrel is with words.  that is the reason i hate vulgar realism in
literature.  the man who could call a spade a spade should be compelled
to use one.  it is the only thing he is fit for."

"then what should we call you, harry?" she asked.

"his name is prince paradox," said dorian.

"i recognize him in a flash," exclaimed the duchess.

"i won't hear of it," laughed lord henry, sinking into a chair.  "from
a label there is no escape!  i refuse the title."

"royalties may not abdicate," fell as a warning from pretty lips.

"you wish me to defend my throne, then?"

"yes."

"i give the truths of to-morrow."

"i prefer the mistakes of to-day," she answered.

"you disarm me, gladys," he cried, catching the wilfulness of her mood.

"of your shield, harry, not of your spear."

"i never tilt against beauty," he said, with a wave of his hand.

"that is your error, harry, believe me.  you value beauty far too much."

"how can you say that?  i admit that i think that it is better to be
beautiful than to be good.  but on the other hand, no one is more ready
than i am to acknowledge that it is better to be good than to be ugly."

"ugliness is one of the seven deadly sins, then?" cried the duchess.
"what becomes of your simile about the orchid?"

"ugliness is one of the seven deadly virtues, gladys.  you, as a good
tory, must not underrate them.  beer, the bible, and the seven deadly
virtues have made our england what she is."

"you don't like your country, then?" she asked.

"i live in it."

"that you may censure it the better."

"would you have me take the verdict of europe on it?" he inquired.

"what do they say of us?"

"that tartuffe has emigrated to england and opened a shop."

"is that yours, harry?"

"i give it to you."

"i could not use it.  it is too true."

"you need not be afraid.  our countrymen never recognize a description."

"they are practical."

"they are more cunning than practical.  when they make up their ledger,
they balance stupidity by wealth, and vice by hypocrisy."

"still, we have done great things."

"great things have been thrust on us, gladys."

"we have carried their burden."

"only as far as the stock exchange."

she shook her head.  "i believe in the race," she cried.

"it represents the survival of the pushing."

"it has development."

"decay fascinates me more."

"what of art?" she asked.

"it is a malady."

"love?"

"an illusion."

"religion?"

"the fashionable substitute for belief."

"you are a sceptic."

"never!  scepticism is the beginning of faith."

"what are you?"

"to define is to limit."

"give me a clue."

"threads snap.  you would lose your way in the labyrinth."

"you bewilder me.  let us talk of some one else."

"our host is a delightful topic.  years ago he was christened prince
charming."

"ah! don't remind me of that," cried dorian gray.

"our host is rather horrid this evening," answered the duchess,
colouring.  "i believe he thinks that monmouth married me on purely
scientific principles as the best specimen he could find of a modern
butterfly."

"well, i hope he won't stick pins into you, duchess," laughed dorian.

"oh! my maid does that already, mr. gray, when she is annoyed with me."

"and what does she get annoyed with you about, duchess?"

"for the most trivial things, mr. gray, i assure you.  usually because
i come in at ten minutes to nine and tell her that i must be dressed by
half-past eight."

"how unreasonable of her!  you should give her warning."

"i daren't, mr. gray.  why, she invents hats for me.  you remember the
one i wore at lady hilstone's garden-party?  you don't, but it is nice
of you to pretend that you do.  well, she made it out of nothing.  all
good hats are made out of nothing."

"like all good reputations, gladys," interrupted lord henry.  "every
effect that one produces gives one an enemy.  to be popular one must be
a mediocrity."

"not with women," said the duchess, shaking her head; "and women rule
the world.  i assure you we can't bear mediocrities.  we women, as some
one says, love with our ears, just as you men love with your eyes, if
you ever love at all."

"it seems to me that we never do anything else," murmured dorian.

"ah! then, you never really love, mr. gray," answered the duchess with
mock sadness.

"my dear gladys!" cried lord henry.  "how can you say that?  romance
lives by repetition, and repetition converts an appetite into an art.
besides, each time that one loves is the only time one has ever loved.
difference of object does not alter singleness of passion.  it merely
intensifies it.  we can have in life but one great experience at best,
and the secret of life is to reproduce that experience as often as
possible."

"even when one has been wounded by it, harry?" asked the duchess after
a pause.

"especially when one has been wounded by it," answered lord henry.

the duchess turned and looked at dorian gray with a curious expression
in her eyes.  "what do you say to that, mr. gray?" she inquired.

dorian hesitated for a moment.  then he threw his head back and
laughed.  "i always agree with harry, duchess."

"even when he is wrong?"

"harry is never wrong, duchess."

"and does his philosophy make you happy?"

"i have never searched for happiness.  who wants happiness?  i have
searched for pleasure."

"and found it, mr. gray?"

"often.  too often."

the duchess sighed.  "i am searching for peace," she said, "and if i
don't go and dress, i shall have none this evening."

"let me get you some orchids, duchess," cried dorian, starting to his
feet and walking down the conservatory.

"you are flirting disgracefully with him," said lord henry to his
cousin.  "you had better take care.  he is very fascinating."

"if he were not, there would be no battle."

"greek meets greek, then?"

"i am on the side of the trojans.  they fought for a woman."

"they were defeated."

"there are worse things than capture," she answered.

"you gallop with a loose rein."

"pace gives life," was the _riposte_.

"i shall write it in my diary to-night."

"what?"

"that a burnt child loves the fire."

"i am not even singed.  my wings are untouched."

"you use them for everything, except flight."

"courage has passed from men to women.  it is a new experience for us."

"you have a rival."

"who?"

he laughed.  "lady narborough," he whispered.  "she perfectly adores
him."

"you fill me with apprehension.  the appeal to antiquity is fatal to us
who are romanticists."

"romanticists!  you have all the methods of science."

"men have educated us."

"but not explained you."

"describe us as a sex," was her challenge.

"sphinxes without secrets."

she looked at him, smiling.  "how long mr. gray is!" she said.  "let us
go and help him.  i have not yet told him the colour of my frock."

"ah! you must suit your frock to his flowers, gladys."

"that would be a premature surrender."

"romantic art begins with its climax."

"i must keep an opportunity for retreat."

"in the parthian manner?"

"they found safety in the desert.  i could not do that."

"women are not always allowed a choice," he answered, but hardly had he
finished the sentence before from the far end of the conservatory came
a stifled groan, followed by the dull sound of a heavy fall.  everybody
started up.  the duchess stood motionless in horror.  and with fear in
his eyes, lord henry rushed through the flapping palms to find dorian
gray lying face downwards on the tiled floor in a deathlike swoon.

he was carried at once into the blue drawing-room and laid upon one of
the sofas.  after a short time, he came to himself and looked round
with a dazed expression.

"what has happened?" he asked.  "oh!  i remember.  am i safe here,
harry?" he began to tremble.

"my dear dorian," answered lord henry, "you merely fainted.  that was
all.  you must have overtired yourself.  you had better not come down
to dinner.  i will take your place."

"no, i will come down," he said, struggling to his feet.  "i would
rather come down.  i must not be alone."

he went to his room and dressed.  there was a wild recklessness of
gaiety in his manner as he sat at table, but now and then a thrill of
terror ran through him when he remembered that, pressed against the
window of the conservatory, like a white handkerchief, he had seen the
face of james vane watching him.



chapter 18

the next day he did not leave the house, and, indeed, spent most of the
time in his own room, sick with a wild terror of dying, and yet
indifferent to life itself.  the consciousness of being hunted, snared,
tracked down, had begun to dominate him.  if the tapestry did but
tremble in the wind, he shook.  the dead leaves that were blown against
the leaded panes seemed to him like his own wasted resolutions and wild
regrets.  when he closed his eyes, he saw again the sailor's face
peering through the mist-stained glass, and horror seemed once more to
lay its hand upon his heart.

but perhaps it had been only his fancy that had called vengeance out of
the night and set the hideous shapes of punishment before him.  actual
life was chaos, but there was something terribly logical in the
imagination.  it was the imagination that set remorse to dog the feet
of sin.  it was the imagination that made each crime bear its misshapen
brood.  in the common world of fact the wicked were not punished, nor
the good rewarded.  success was given to the strong, failure thrust
upon the weak.  that was all.  besides, had any stranger been prowling
round the house, he would have been seen by the servants or the
keepers.  had any foot-marks been found on the flower-beds, the
gardeners would have reported it.  yes, it had been merely fancy.
sibyl vane's brother had not come back to kill him.  he had sailed away
in his ship to founder in some winter sea.  from him, at any rate, he
was safe.  why, the man did not know who he was, could not know who he
was.  the mask of youth had saved him.

and yet if it had been merely an illusion, how terrible it was to think
that conscience could raise such fearful phantoms, and give them
visible form, and make them move before one!  what sort of life would
his be if, day and night, shadows of his crime were to peer at him from
silent corners, to mock him from secret places, to whisper in his ear
as he sat at the feast, to wake him with icy fingers as he lay asleep!
as the thought crept through his brain, he grew pale with terror, and
the air seemed to him to have become suddenly colder.  oh! in what a
wild hour of madness he had killed his friend!  how ghastly the mere
memory of the scene!  he saw it all again.  each hideous detail came
back to him with added horror.  out of the black cave of time, terrible
and swathed in scarlet, rose the image of his sin.  when lord henry
came in at six o'clock, he found him crying as one whose heart will
break.

it was not till the third day that he ventured to go out.  there was
something in the clear, pine-scented air of that winter morning that
seemed to bring him back his joyousness and his ardour for life.  but
it was not merely the physical conditions of environment that had
caused the change.  his own nature had revolted against the excess of
anguish that had sought to maim and mar the perfection of its calm.
with subtle and finely wrought temperaments it is always so.  their
strong passions must either bruise or bend.  they either slay the man,
or themselves die.  shallow sorrows and shallow loves live on.  the
loves and sorrows that are great are destroyed by their own plenitude.
besides, he had convinced himself that he had been the victim of a
terror-stricken imagination, and looked back now on his fears with
something of pity and not a little of contempt.

after breakfast, he walked with the duchess for an hour in the garden
and then drove across the park to join the shooting-party. the crisp
frost lay like salt upon the grass.  the sky was an inverted cup of
blue metal.  a thin film of ice bordered the flat, reed-grown lake.

at the corner of the pine-wood he caught sight of sir geoffrey
clouston, the duchess's brother, jerking two spent cartridges out of
his gun.  he jumped from the cart, and having told the groom to take
the mare home, made his way towards his guest through the withered
bracken and rough undergrowth.

"have you had good sport, geoffrey?" he asked.

"not very good, dorian.  i think most of the birds have gone to the
open.  i dare say it will be better after lunch, when we get to new
ground."

dorian strolled along by his side.  the keen aromatic air, the brown
and red lights that glimmered in the wood, the hoarse cries of the
beaters ringing out from time to time, and the sharp snaps of the guns
that followed, fascinated him and filled him with a sense of delightful
freedom.  he was dominated by the carelessness of happiness, by the
high indifference of joy.

suddenly from a lumpy tussock of old grass some twenty yards in front
of them, with black-tipped ears erect and long hinder limbs throwing it
forward, started a hare.  it bolted for a thicket of alders.  sir
geoffrey put his gun to his shoulder, but there was something in the
animal's grace of movement that strangely charmed dorian gray, and he
cried out at once, "don't shoot it, geoffrey.  let it live."

"what nonsense, dorian!" laughed his companion, and as the hare bounded
into the thicket, he fired.  there were two cries heard, the cry of a
hare in pain, which is dreadful, the cry of a man in agony, which is
worse.

"good heavens!  i have hit a beater!" exclaimed sir geoffrey.  "what an
ass the man was to get in front of the guns!  stop shooting there!" he
called out at the top of his voice.  "a man is hurt."

the head-keeper came running up with a stick in his hand.

"where, sir?  where is he?" he shouted.  at the same time, the firing
ceased along the line.

"here," answered sir geoffrey angrily, hurrying towards the thicket.
"why on earth don't you keep your men back?  spoiled my shooting for
the day."

dorian watched them as they plunged into the alder-clump, brushing the
lithe swinging branches aside.  in a few moments they emerged, dragging
a body after them into the sunlight.  he turned away in horror.  it
seemed to him that misfortune followed wherever he went.  he heard sir
geoffrey ask if the man was really dead, and the affirmative answer of
the keeper.  the wood seemed to him to have become suddenly alive with
faces.  there was the trampling of myriad feet and the low buzz of
voices.  a great copper-breasted pheasant came beating through the
boughs overhead.

after a few moments--that were to him, in his perturbed state, like
endless hours of pain--he felt a hand laid on his shoulder.  he started
and looked round.

"dorian," said lord henry, "i had better tell them that the shooting is
stopped for to-day. it would not look well to go on."

"i wish it were stopped for ever, harry," he answered bitterly.  "the
whole thing is hideous and cruel.  is the man ...?"

he could not finish the sentence.

"i am afraid so," rejoined lord henry.  "he got the whole charge of
shot in his chest.  he must have died almost instantaneously.  come;
let us go home."

they walked side by side in the direction of the avenue for nearly
fifty yards without speaking.  then dorian looked at lord henry and
said, with a heavy sigh, "it is a bad omen, harry, a very bad omen."

"what is?" asked lord henry.  "oh! this accident, i suppose.  my dear
fellow, it can't be helped.  it was the man's own fault.  why did he
get in front of the guns?  besides, it is nothing to us.  it is rather
awkward for geoffrey, of course.  it does not do to pepper beaters.  it
makes people think that one is a wild shot.  and geoffrey is not; he
shoots very straight.  but there is no use talking about the matter."

dorian shook his head.  "it is a bad omen, harry.  i feel as if
something horrible were going to happen to some of us.  to myself,
perhaps," he added, passing his hand over his eyes, with a gesture of
pain.

the elder man laughed.  "the only horrible thing in the world is _ennui_,
dorian.  that is the one sin for which there is no forgiveness.  but we
are not likely to suffer from it unless these fellows keep chattering
about this thing at dinner.  i must tell them that the subject is to be
tabooed.  as for omens, there is no such thing as an omen.  destiny
does not send us heralds.  she is too wise or too cruel for that.
besides, what on earth could happen to you, dorian?  you have
everything in the world that a man can want.  there is no one who would
not be delighted to change places with you."

"there is no one with whom i would not change places, harry.  don't
laugh like that.  i am telling you the truth.  the wretched peasant who
has just died is better off than i am.  i have no terror of death.  it
is the coming of death that terrifies me.  its monstrous wings seem to
wheel in the leaden air around me.  good heavens! don't you see a man
moving behind the trees there, watching me, waiting for me?"

lord henry looked in the direction in which the trembling gloved hand
was pointing.  "yes," he said, smiling, "i see the gardener waiting for
you.  i suppose he wants to ask you what flowers you wish to have on
the table to-night. how absurdly nervous you are, my dear fellow!  you
must come and see my doctor, when we get back to town."

dorian heaved a sigh of relief as he saw the gardener approaching.  the
man touched his hat, glanced for a moment at lord henry in a hesitating
manner, and then produced a letter, which he handed to his master.
"her grace told me to wait for an answer," he murmured.

dorian put the letter into his pocket.  "tell her grace that i am
coming in," he said, coldly.  the man turned round and went rapidly in
the direction of the house.

"how fond women are of doing dangerous things!" laughed lord henry.
"it is one of the qualities in them that i admire most.  a woman will
flirt with anybody in the world as long as other people are looking on."

"how fond you are of saying dangerous things, harry!  in the present
instance, you are quite astray.  i like the duchess very much, but i
don't love her."

"and the duchess loves you very much, but she likes you less, so you
are excellently matched."

"you are talking scandal, harry, and there is never any basis for
scandal."

"the basis of every scandal is an immoral certainty," said lord henry,
lighting a cigarette.

"you would sacrifice anybody, harry, for the sake of an epigram."

"the world goes to the altar of its own accord," was the answer.

"i wish i could love," cried dorian gray with a deep note of pathos in
his voice.  "but i seem to have lost the passion and forgotten the
desire.  i am too much concentrated on myself.  my own personality has
become a burden to me.  i want to escape, to go away, to forget.  it
was silly of me to come down here at all.  i think i shall send a wire
to harvey to have the yacht got ready.  on a yacht one is safe."

"safe from what, dorian?  you are in some trouble.  why not tell me
what it is?  you know i would help you."

"i can't tell you, harry," he answered sadly.  "and i dare say it is
only a fancy of mine.  this unfortunate accident has upset me.  i have
a horrible presentiment that something of the kind may happen to me."

"what nonsense!"

"i hope it is, but i can't help feeling it.  ah! here is the duchess,
looking like artemis in a tailor-made gown.  you see we have come back,
duchess."

"i have heard all about it, mr. gray," she answered.  "poor geoffrey is
terribly upset.  and it seems that you asked him not to shoot the hare.
how curious!"

"yes, it was very curious.  i don't know what made me say it.  some
whim, i suppose.  it looked the loveliest of little live things.  but i
am sorry they told you about the man.  it is a hideous subject."

"it is an annoying subject," broke in lord henry.  "it has no
psychological value at all.  now if geoffrey had done the thing on
purpose, how interesting he would be!  i should like to know some one
who had committed a real murder."

"how horrid of you, harry!" cried the duchess.  "isn't it, mr. gray?
harry, mr. gray is ill again.  he is going to faint."

dorian drew himself up with an effort and smiled.  "it is nothing,
duchess," he murmured; "my nerves are dreadfully out of order.  that is
all.  i am afraid i walked too far this morning.  i didn't hear what
harry said.  was it very bad?  you must tell me some other time.  i
think i must go and lie down.  you will excuse me, won't you?"

they had reached the great flight of steps that led from the
conservatory on to the terrace.  as the glass door closed behind
dorian, lord henry turned and looked at the duchess with his slumberous
eyes.  "are you very much in love with him?" he asked.

she did not answer for some time, but stood gazing at the landscape.
"i wish i knew," she said at last.

he shook his head.  "knowledge would be fatal.  it is the uncertainty
that charms one.  a mist makes things wonderful."

"one may lose one's way."

"all ways end at the same point, my dear gladys."

"what is that?"

"disillusion."

"it was my _debut_ in life," she sighed.

"it came to you crowned."

"i am tired of strawberry leaves."

"they become you."

"only in public."

"you would miss them," said lord henry.

"i will not part with a petal."

"monmouth has ears."

"old age is dull of hearing."

"has he never been jealous?"

"i wish he had been."

he glanced about as if in search of something.  "what are you looking
for?" she inquired.

"the button from your foil," he answered.  "you have dropped it."

she laughed.  "i have still the mask."

"it makes your eyes lovelier," was his reply.

she laughed again.  her teeth showed like white seeds in a scarlet
fruit.

upstairs, in his own room, dorian gray was lying on a sofa, with terror
in every tingling fibre of his body.  life had suddenly become too
hideous a burden for him to bear.  the dreadful death of the unlucky
beater, shot in the thicket like a wild animal, had seemed to him to
pre-figure death for himself also.  he had nearly swooned at what lord
henry had said in a chance mood of cynical jesting.

at five o'clock he rang his bell for his servant and gave him orders to
pack his things for the night-express to town, and to have the brougham
at the door by eight-thirty. he was determined not to sleep another
night at selby royal.  it was an ill-omened place.  death walked there
in the sunlight.  the grass of the forest had been spotted with blood.

then he wrote a note to lord henry, telling him that he was going up to
town to consult his doctor and asking him to entertain his guests in
his absence.  as he was putting it into the envelope, a knock came to
the door, and his valet informed him that the head-keeper wished to see
him.  he frowned and bit his lip.  "send him in," he muttered, after
some moments' hesitation.

as soon as the man entered, dorian pulled his chequebook out of a
drawer and spread it out before him.

"i suppose you have come about the unfortunate accident of this
morning, thornton?" he said, taking up a pen.

"yes, sir," answered the gamekeeper.

"was the poor fellow married?  had he any people dependent on him?"
asked dorian, looking bored.  "if so, i should not like them to be left
in want, and will send them any sum of money you may think necessary."

"we don't know who he is, sir.  that is what i took the liberty of
coming to you about."

"don't know who he is?" said dorian, listlessly.  "what do you mean?
wasn't he one of your men?"

"no, sir.  never saw him before.  seems like a sailor, sir."

the pen dropped from dorian gray's hand, and he felt as if his heart
had suddenly stopped beating.  "a sailor?" he cried out.  "did you say
a sailor?"

"yes, sir.  he looks as if he had been a sort of sailor; tattooed on
both arms, and that kind of thing."

"was there anything found on him?" said dorian, leaning forward and
looking at the man with startled eyes.  "anything that would tell his
name?"

"some money, sir--not much, and a six-shooter. there was no name of any
kind.  a decent-looking man, sir, but rough-like. a sort of sailor we
think."

dorian started to his feet.  a terrible hope fluttered past him.  he
clutched at it madly.  "where is the body?" he exclaimed.  "quick!  i
must see it at once."

"it is in an empty stable in the home farm, sir.  the folk don't like
to have that sort of thing in their houses.  they say a corpse brings
bad luck."

"the home farm!  go there at once and meet me.  tell one of the grooms
to bring my horse round.  no. never mind.  i'll go to the stables
myself.  it will save time."

in less than a quarter of an hour, dorian gray was galloping down the
long avenue as hard as he could go.  the trees seemed to sweep past him
in spectral procession, and wild shadows to fling themselves across his
path.  once the mare swerved at a white gate-post and nearly threw him.
he lashed her across the neck with his crop.  she cleft the dusky air
like an arrow.  the stones flew from her hoofs.

at last he reached the home farm.  two men were loitering in the yard.
he leaped from the saddle and threw the reins to one of them.  in the
farthest stable a light was glimmering.  something seemed to tell him
that the body was there, and he hurried to the door and put his hand
upon the latch.

there he paused for a moment, feeling that he was on the brink of a
discovery that would either make or mar his life.  then he thrust the
door open and entered.

on a heap of sacking in the far corner was lying the dead body of a man
dressed in a coarse shirt and a pair of blue trousers.  a spotted
handkerchief had been placed over the face.  a coarse candle, stuck in
a bottle, sputtered beside it.

dorian gray shuddered.  he felt that his could not be the hand to take
the handkerchief away, and called out to one of the farm-servants to
come to him.

"take that thing off the face.  i wish to see it," he said, clutching
at the door-post for support.

when the farm-servant had done so, he stepped forward.  a cry of joy
broke from his lips.  the man who had been shot in the thicket was
james vane.

he stood there for some minutes looking at the dead body.  as he rode
home, his eyes were full of tears, for he knew he was safe.



chapter 19

"there is no use your telling me that you are going to be good," cried
lord henry, dipping his white fingers into a red copper bowl filled
with rose-water. "you are quite perfect.  pray, don't change."

dorian gray shook his head.  "no, harry, i have done too many dreadful
things in my life.  i am not going to do any more.  i began my good
actions yesterday."

"where were you yesterday?"

"in the country, harry.  i was staying at a little inn by myself."

"my dear boy," said lord henry, smiling, "anybody can be good in the
country.  there are no temptations there.  that is the reason why
people who live out of town are so absolutely uncivilized.
civilization is not by any means an easy thing to attain to.  there are
only two ways by which man can reach it.  one is by being cultured, the
other by being corrupt.  country people have no opportunity of being
either, so they stagnate."

"culture and corruption," echoed dorian.  "i have known something of
both.  it seems terrible to me now that they should ever be found
together.  for i have a new ideal, harry.  i am going to alter.  i
think i have altered."

"you have not yet told me what your good action was.  or did you say
you had done more than one?" asked his companion as he spilled into his
plate a little crimson pyramid of seeded strawberries and, through a
perforated, shell-shaped spoon, snowed white sugar upon them.

"i can tell you, harry.  it is not a story i could tell to any one
else.  i spared somebody.  it sounds vain, but you understand what i
mean.  she was quite beautiful and wonderfully like sibyl vane.  i
think it was that which first attracted me to her.  you remember sibyl,
don't you?  how long ago that seems!  well, hetty was not one of our
own class, of course.  she was simply a girl in a village.  but i
really loved her.  i am quite sure that i loved her.  all during this
wonderful may that we have been having, i used to run down and see her
two or three times a week.  yesterday she met me in a little orchard.
the apple-blossoms kept tumbling down on her hair, and she was
laughing.  we were to have gone away together this morning at dawn.
suddenly i determined to leave her as flowerlike as i had found her."

"i should think the novelty of the emotion must have given you a thrill
of real pleasure, dorian," interrupted lord henry.  "but i can finish
your idyll for you.  you gave her good advice and broke her heart.
that was the beginning of your reformation."

"harry, you are horrible!  you mustn't say these dreadful things.
hetty's heart is not broken.  of course, she cried and all that.  but
there is no disgrace upon her.  she can live, like perdita, in her
garden of mint and marigold."

"and weep over a faithless florizel," said lord henry, laughing, as he
leaned back in his chair.  "my dear dorian, you have the most curiously
boyish moods.  do you think this girl will ever be really content now
with any one of her own rank?  i suppose she will be married some day
to a rough carter or a grinning ploughman.  well, the fact of having
met you, and loved you, will teach her to despise her husband, and she
will be wretched.  from a moral point of view, i cannot say that i
think much of your great renunciation.  even as a beginning, it is
poor.  besides, how do you know that hetty isn't floating at the
present moment in some starlit mill-pond, with lovely water-lilies
round her, like ophelia?"

"i can't bear this, harry!  you mock at everything, and then suggest
the most serious tragedies.  i am sorry i told you now.  i don't care
what you say to me.  i know i was right in acting as i did.  poor
hetty!  as i rode past the farm this morning, i saw her white face at
the window, like a spray of jasmine.  don't let us talk about it any
more, and don't try to persuade me that the first good action i have
done for years, the first little bit of self-sacrifice i have ever
known, is really a sort of sin.  i want to be better.  i am going to be
better.  tell me something about yourself.  what is going on in town?
i have not been to the club for days."

"the people are still discussing poor basil's disappearance."

"i should have thought they had got tired of that by this time," said
dorian, pouring himself out some wine and frowning slightly.

"my dear boy, they have only been talking about it for six weeks, and
the british public are really not equal to the mental strain of having
more than one topic every three months.  they have been very fortunate
lately, however.  they have had my own divorce-case and alan campbell's
suicide.  now they have got the mysterious disappearance of an artist.
scotland yard still insists that the man in the grey ulster who left
for paris by the midnight train on the ninth of november was poor
basil, and the french police declare that basil never arrived in paris
at all.  i suppose in about a fortnight we shall be told that he has
been seen in san francisco.  it is an odd thing, but every one who
disappears is said to be seen at san francisco.  it must be a
delightful city, and possess all the attractions of the next world."

"what do you think has happened to basil?" asked dorian, holding up his
burgundy against the light and wondering how it was that he could
discuss the matter so calmly.

"i have not the slightest idea.  if basil chooses to hide himself, it
is no business of mine.  if he is dead, i don't want to think about
him.  death is the only thing that ever terrifies me.  i hate it."

"why?" said the younger man wearily.

"because," said lord henry, passing beneath his nostrils the gilt
trellis of an open vinaigrette box, "one can survive everything
nowadays except that.  death and vulgarity are the only two facts in
the nineteenth century that one cannot explain away.  let us have our
coffee in the music-room, dorian.  you must play chopin to me.  the man
with whom my wife ran away played chopin exquisitely.  poor victoria!
i was very fond of her.  the house is rather lonely without her.  of
course, married life is merely a habit, a bad habit.  but then one
regrets the loss even of one's worst habits.  perhaps one regrets them
the most.  they are such an essential part of one's personality."

dorian said nothing, but rose from the table, and passing into the next
room, sat down to the piano and let his fingers stray across the white
and black ivory of the keys.  after the coffee had been brought in, he
stopped, and looking over at lord henry, said, "harry, did it ever
occur to you that basil was murdered?"

lord henry yawned.  "basil was very popular, and always wore a
waterbury watch.  why should he have been murdered?  he was not clever
enough to have enemies.  of course, he had a wonderful genius for
painting.  but a man can paint like velasquez and yet be as dull as
possible.  basil was really rather dull.  he only interested me once,
and that was when he told me, years ago, that he had a wild adoration
for you and that you were the dominant motive of his art."

"i was very fond of basil," said dorian with a note of sadness in his
voice.  "but don't people say that he was murdered?"

"oh, some of the papers do.  it does not seem to me to be at all
probable.  i know there are dreadful places in paris, but basil was not
the sort of man to have gone to them.  he had no curiosity.  it was his
chief defect."

"what would you say, harry, if i told you that i had murdered basil?"
said the younger man.  he watched him intently after he had spoken.

"i would say, my dear fellow, that you were posing for a character that
doesn't suit you.  all crime is vulgar, just as all vulgarity is crime.
it is not in you, dorian, to commit a murder.  i am sorry if i hurt
your vanity by saying so, but i assure you it is true.  crime belongs
exclusively to the lower orders.  i don't blame them in the smallest
degree.  i should fancy that crime was to them what art is to us,
simply a method of procuring extraordinary sensations."

"a method of procuring sensations?  do you think, then, that a man who
has once committed a murder could possibly do the same crime again?
don't tell me that."

"oh! anything becomes a pleasure if one does it too often," cried lord
henry, laughing.  "that is one of the most important secrets of life.
i should fancy, however, that murder is always a mistake.  one should
never do anything that one cannot talk about after dinner.  but let us
pass from poor basil.  i wish i could believe that he had come to such
a really romantic end as you suggest, but i can't. i dare say he fell
into the seine off an omnibus and that the conductor hushed up the
scandal.  yes:  i should fancy that was his end.  i see him lying now
on his back under those dull-green waters, with the heavy barges
floating over him and long weeds catching in his hair.  do you know, i
don't think he would have done much more good work.  during the last
ten years his painting had gone off very much."

dorian heaved a sigh, and lord henry strolled across the room and began
to stroke the head of a curious java parrot, a large, grey-plumaged
bird with pink crest and tail, that was balancing itself upon a bamboo
perch.  as his pointed fingers touched it, it dropped the white scurf
of crinkled lids over black, glasslike eyes and began to sway backwards
and forwards.

"yes," he continued, turning round and taking his handkerchief out of
his pocket; "his painting had quite gone off.  it seemed to me to have
lost something.  it had lost an ideal.  when you and he ceased to be
great friends, he ceased to be a great artist.  what was it separated
you?  i suppose he bored you.  if so, he never forgave you.  it's a
habit bores have.  by the way, what has become of that wonderful
portrait he did of you?  i don't think i have ever seen it since he
finished it.  oh!  i remember your telling me years ago that you had
sent it down to selby, and that it had got mislaid or stolen on the
way.  you never got it back?  what a pity! it was really a
masterpiece.  i remember i wanted to buy it.  i wish i had now.  it
belonged to basil's best period.  since then, his work was that curious
mixture of bad painting and good intentions that always entitles a man
to be called a representative british artist.  did you advertise for
it?  you should."

"i forget," said dorian.  "i suppose i did.  but i never really liked
it.  i am sorry i sat for it.  the memory of the thing is hateful to
me.  why do you talk of it?  it used to remind me of those curious
lines in some play--hamlet, i think--how do they run?--

    "like the painting of a sorrow,
     a face without a heart."

yes:  that is what it was like."

lord henry laughed.  "if a man treats life artistically, his brain is
his heart," he answered, sinking into an arm-chair.

dorian gray shook his head and struck some soft chords on the piano.
"'like the painting of a sorrow,'" he repeated, "'a face without a
heart.'"

the elder man lay back and looked at him with half-closed eyes.  "by
the way, dorian," he said after a pause, "'what does it profit a man if
he gain the whole world and lose--how does the quotation run?--his own
soul'?"

the music jarred, and dorian gray started and stared at his friend.
"why do you ask me that, harry?"

"my dear fellow," said lord henry, elevating his eyebrows in surprise,
"i asked you because i thought you might be able to give me an answer.
that is all.  i was going through the park last sunday, and close by
the marble arch there stood a little crowd of shabby-looking people
listening to some vulgar street-preacher. as i passed by, i heard the
man yelling out that question to his audience.  it struck me as being
rather dramatic.  london is very rich in curious effects of that kind.
a wet sunday, an uncouth christian in a mackintosh, a ring of sickly
white faces under a broken roof of dripping umbrellas, and a wonderful
phrase flung into the air by shrill hysterical lips--it was really very
good in its way, quite a suggestion.  i thought of telling the prophet
that art had a soul, but that man had not.  i am afraid, however, he
would not have understood me."

"don't, harry.  the soul is a terrible reality.  it can be bought, and
sold, and bartered away.  it can be poisoned, or made perfect.  there
is a soul in each one of us.  i know it."

"do you feel quite sure of that, dorian?"

"quite sure."

"ah! then it must be an illusion.  the things one feels absolutely
certain about are never true.  that is the fatality of faith, and the
lesson of romance.  how grave you are!  don't be so serious.  what have
you or i to do with the superstitions of our age?  no:  we have given
up our belief in the soul.  play me something.  play me a nocturne,
dorian, and, as you play, tell me, in a low voice, how you have kept
your youth.  you must have some secret.  i am only ten years older than
you are, and i am wrinkled, and worn, and yellow.  you are really
wonderful, dorian.  you have never looked more charming than you do
to-night. you remind me of the day i saw you first.  you were rather
cheeky, very shy, and absolutely extraordinary.  you have changed, of
course, but not in appearance.  i wish you would tell me your secret.
to get back my youth i would do anything in the world, except take
exercise, get up early, or be respectable.  youth!  there is nothing
like it.  it's absurd to talk of the ignorance of youth.  the only
people to whose opinions i listen now with any respect are people much
younger than myself.  they seem in front of me.  life has revealed to
them her latest wonder.  as for the aged, i always contradict the aged.
i do it on principle.  if you ask them their opinion on something that
happened yesterday, they solemnly give you the opinions current in
1820, when people wore high stocks, believed in everything, and knew
absolutely nothing.  how lovely that thing you are playing is!  i
wonder, did chopin write it at majorca, with the sea weeping round the
villa and the salt spray dashing against the panes?  it is marvellously
romantic.  what a blessing it is that there is one art left to us that
is not imitative!  don't stop.  i want music to-night. it seems to me
that you are the young apollo and that i am marsyas listening to you.
i have sorrows, dorian, of my own, that even you know nothing of.  the
tragedy of old age is not that one is old, but that one is young.  i am
amazed sometimes at my own sincerity.  ah, dorian, how happy you are!
what an exquisite life you have had!  you have drunk deeply of
everything.  you have crushed the grapes against your palate.  nothing
has been hidden from you.  and it has all been to you no more than the
sound of music.  it has not marred you.  you are still the same."

"i am not the same, harry."

"yes, you are the same.  i wonder what the rest of your life will be.
don't spoil it by renunciations.  at present you are a perfect type.
don't make yourself incomplete.  you are quite flawless now.  you need
not shake your head:  you know you are.  besides, dorian, don't deceive
yourself.  life is not governed by will or intention.  life is a
question of nerves, and fibres, and slowly built-up cells in which
thought hides itself and passion has its dreams.  you may fancy
yourself safe and think yourself strong.  but a chance tone of colour
in a room or a morning sky, a particular perfume that you had once
loved and that brings subtle memories with it, a line from a forgotten
poem that you had come across again, a cadence from a piece of music
that you had ceased to play--i tell you, dorian, that it is on things
like these that our lives depend.  browning writes about that
somewhere; but our own senses will imagine them for us.  there are
moments when the odour of _lilas blanc_ passes suddenly across me, and i
have to live the strangest month of my life over again.  i wish i could
change places with you, dorian.  the world has cried out against us
both, but it has always worshipped you.  it always will worship you.
you are the type of what the age is searching for, and what it is
afraid it has found.  i am so glad that you have never done anything,
never carved a statue, or painted a picture, or produced anything
outside of yourself!  life has been your art.  you have set yourself to
music.  your days are your sonnets."

dorian rose up from the piano and passed his hand through his hair.
"yes, life has been exquisite," he murmured, "but i am not going to
have the same life, harry.  and you must not say these extravagant
things to me.  you don't know everything about me.  i think that if you
did, even you would turn from me.  you laugh.  don't laugh."

"why have you stopped playing, dorian?  go back and give me the
nocturne over again.  look at that great, honey-coloured moon that
hangs in the dusky air.  she is waiting for you to charm her, and if
you play she will come closer to the earth.  you won't?  let us go to
the club, then.  it has been a charming evening, and we must end it
charmingly.  there is some one at white's who wants immensely to know
you--young lord poole, bournemouth's eldest son.  he has already copied
your neckties, and has begged me to introduce him to you.  he is quite
delightful and rather reminds me of you."

"i hope not," said dorian with a sad look in his eyes.  "but i am tired
to-night, harry.  i shan't go to the club.  it is nearly eleven, and i
want to go to bed early."

"do stay.  you have never played so well as to-night. there was
something in your touch that was wonderful.  it had more expression
than i had ever heard from it before."

"it is because i am going to be good," he answered, smiling.  "i am a
little changed already."

"you cannot change to me, dorian," said lord henry.  "you and i will
always be friends."

"yet you poisoned me with a book once.  i should not forgive that.
harry, promise me that you will never lend that book to any one.  it
does harm."

"my dear boy, you are really beginning to moralize.  you will soon be
going about like the converted, and the revivalist, warning people
against all the sins of which you have grown tired.  you are much too
delightful to do that.  besides, it is no use.  you and i are what we
are, and will be what we will be.  as for being poisoned by a book,
there is no such thing as that.  art has no influence upon action.  it
annihilates the desire to act.  it is superbly sterile.  the books that
the world calls immoral are books that show the world its own shame.
that is all.  but we won't discuss literature.  come round to-morrow. i
am going to ride at eleven.  we might go together, and i will take you
to lunch afterwards with lady branksome.  she is a charming woman, and
wants to consult you about some tapestries she is thinking of buying.
mind you come.  or shall we lunch with our little duchess?  she says
she never sees you now.  perhaps you are tired of gladys?  i thought
you would be.  her clever tongue gets on one's nerves.  well, in any
case, be here at eleven."

"must i really come, harry?"

"certainly.  the park is quite lovely now.  i don't think there have
been such lilacs since the year i met you."

"very well.  i shall be here at eleven," said dorian.  "good night,
harry."  as he reached the door, he hesitated for a moment, as if he
had something more to say.  then he sighed and went out.



chapter 20

it was a lovely night, so warm that he threw his coat over his arm and
did not even put his silk scarf round his throat.  as he strolled home,
smoking his cigarette, two young men in evening dress passed him.  he
heard one of them whisper to the other, "that is dorian gray." he
remembered how pleased he used to be when he was pointed out, or stared
at, or talked about.  he was tired of hearing his own name now.  half
the charm of the little village where he had been so often lately was
that no one knew who he was.  he had often told the girl whom he had
lured to love him that he was poor, and she had believed him.  he had
told her once that he was wicked, and she had laughed at him and
answered that wicked people were always very old and very ugly.  what a
laugh she had!--just like a thrush singing.  and how pretty she had
been in her cotton dresses and her large hats!  she knew nothing, but
she had everything that he had lost.

when he reached home, he found his servant waiting up for him.  he sent
him to bed, and threw himself down on the sofa in the library, and
began to think over some of the things that lord henry had said to him.

was it really true that one could never change?  he felt a wild longing
for the unstained purity of his boyhood--his rose-white boyhood, as
lord henry had once called it.  he knew that he had tarnished himself,
filled his mind with corruption and given horror to his fancy; that he
had been an evil influence to others, and had experienced a terrible
joy in being so; and that of the lives that had crossed his own, it had
been the fairest and the most full of promise that he had brought to
shame.  but was it all irretrievable?  was there no hope for him?

ah! in what a monstrous moment of pride and passion he had prayed that
the portrait should bear the burden of his days, and he keep the
unsullied splendour of eternal youth!  all his failure had been due to
that.  better for him that each sin of his life had brought its sure
swift penalty along with it.  there was purification in punishment.
not "forgive us our sins" but "smite us for our iniquities" should be
the prayer of man to a most just god.

the curiously carved mirror that lord henry had given to him, so many
years ago now, was standing on the table, and the white-limbed cupids
laughed round it as of old.  he took it up, as he had done on that
night of horror when he had first noted the change in the fatal
picture, and with wild, tear-dimmed eyes looked into its polished
shield.  once, some one who had terribly loved him had written to him a
mad letter, ending with these idolatrous words: "the world is changed
because you are made of ivory and gold.  the curves of your lips
rewrite history."  the phrases came back to his memory, and he repeated
them over and over to himself.  then he loathed his own beauty, and
flinging the mirror on the floor, crushed it into silver splinters
beneath his heel.  it was his beauty that had ruined him, his beauty
and the youth that he had prayed for.  but for those two things, his
life might have been free from stain.  his beauty had been to him but a
mask, his youth but a mockery.  what was youth at best?  a green, an
unripe time, a time of shallow moods, and sickly thoughts.  why had he
worn its livery?  youth had spoiled him.

it was better not to think of the past.  nothing could alter that.  it
was of himself, and of his own future, that he had to think.  james
vane was hidden in a nameless grave in selby churchyard.  alan campbell
had shot himself one night in his laboratory, but had not revealed the
secret that he had been forced to know.  the excitement, such as it
was, over basil hallward's disappearance would soon pass away.  it was
already waning.  he was perfectly safe there.  nor, indeed, was it the
death of basil hallward that weighed most upon his mind.  it was the
living death of his own soul that troubled him.  basil had painted the
portrait that had marred his life.  he could not forgive him that.  it
was the portrait that had done everything.  basil had said things to
him that were unbearable, and that he had yet borne with patience.  the
murder had been simply the madness of a moment.  as for alan campbell,
his suicide had been his own act.  he had chosen to do it.  it was
nothing to him.

a new life!  that was what he wanted.  that was what he was waiting
for.  surely he had begun it already.  he had spared one innocent
thing, at any rate.  he would never again tempt innocence.  he would be
good.

as he thought of hetty merton, he began to wonder if the portrait in
the locked room had changed.  surely it was not still so horrible as it
had been?  perhaps if his life became pure, he would be able to expel
every sign of evil passion from the face.  perhaps the signs of evil
had already gone away.  he would go and look.

he took the lamp from the table and crept upstairs.  as he unbarred the
door, a smile of joy flitted across his strangely young-looking face
and lingered for a moment about his lips.  yes, he would be good, and
the hideous thing that he had hidden away would no longer be a terror
to him.  he felt as if the load had been lifted from him already.

he went in quietly, locking the door behind him, as was his custom, and
dragged the purple hanging from the portrait.  a cry of pain and
indignation broke from him.  he could see no change, save that in the
eyes there was a look of cunning and in the mouth the curved wrinkle of
the hypocrite.  the thing was still loathsome--more loathsome, if
possible, than before--and the scarlet dew that spotted the hand seemed
brighter, and more like blood newly spilled.  then he trembled.  had it
been merely vanity that had made him do his one good deed?  or the
desire for a new sensation, as lord henry had hinted, with his mocking
laugh?  or that passion to act a part that sometimes makes us do things
finer than we are ourselves?  or, perhaps, all these?  and why was the
red stain larger than it had been?  it seemed to have crept like a
horrible disease over the wrinkled fingers.  there was blood on the
painted feet, as though the thing had dripped--blood even on the hand
that had not held the knife.  confess?  did it mean that he was to
confess?  to give himself up and be put to death?  he laughed.  he felt
that the idea was monstrous.  besides, even if he did confess, who
would believe him?  there was no trace of the murdered man anywhere.
everything belonging to him had been destroyed.  he himself had burned
what had been below-stairs. the world would simply say that he was mad.
they would shut him up if he persisted in his story.... yet it was
his duty to confess, to suffer public shame, and to make public
atonement.  there was a god who called upon men to tell their sins to
earth as well as to heaven.  nothing that he could do would cleanse him
till he had told his own sin.  his sin?  he shrugged his shoulders.
the death of basil hallward seemed very little to him.  he was thinking
of hetty merton.  for it was an unjust mirror, this mirror of his soul
that he was looking at.  vanity?  curiosity?  hypocrisy?  had there
been nothing more in his renunciation than that?  there had been
something more.  at least he thought so.  but who could tell? ... no.
there had been nothing more.  through vanity he had spared her.  in
hypocrisy he had worn the mask of goodness.  for curiosity's sake he
had tried the denial of self.  he recognized that now.

but this murder--was it to dog him all his life?  was he always to be
burdened by his past?  was he really to confess?  never.  there was
only one bit of evidence left against him.  the picture itself--that
was evidence.  he would destroy it.  why had he kept it so long?  once
it had given him pleasure to watch it changing and growing old.  of
late he had felt no such pleasure.  it had kept him awake at night.
when he had been away, he had been filled with terror lest other eyes
should look upon it.  it had brought melancholy across his passions.
its mere memory had marred many moments of joy.  it had been like
conscience to him.  yes, it had been conscience.  he would destroy it.

he looked round and saw the knife that had stabbed basil hallward.  he
had cleaned it many times, till there was no stain left upon it.  it
was bright, and glistened.  as it had killed the painter, so it would
kill the painter's work, and all that that meant.  it would kill the
past, and when that was dead, he would be free.  it would kill this
monstrous soul-life, and without its hideous warnings, he would be at
peace.  he seized the thing, and stabbed the picture with it.

there was a cry heard, and a crash.  the cry was so horrible in its
agony that the frightened servants woke and crept out of their rooms.
two gentlemen, who were passing in the square below, stopped and looked
up at the great house.  they walked on till they met a policeman and
brought him back.  the man rang the bell several times, but there was
no answer.  except for a light in one of the top windows, the house was
all dark.  after a time, he went away and stood in an adjoining portico
and watched.

"whose house is that, constable?" asked the elder of the two gentlemen.

"mr. dorian gray's, sir," answered the policeman.

they looked at each other, as they walked away, and sneered.  one of
them was sir henry ashton's uncle.

inside, in the servants' part of the house, the half-clad domestics
were talking in low whispers to each other.  old mrs. leaf was crying
and wringing her hands.  francis was as pale as death.

after about a quarter of an hour, he got the coachman and one of the
footmen and crept upstairs.  they knocked, but there was no reply.
they called out.  everything was still.  finally, after vainly trying
to force the door, they got on the roof and dropped down on to the
balcony.  the windows yielded easily--their bolts were old.

when they entered, they found hanging upon the wall a splendid portrait
of their master as they had last seen him, in all the wonder of his
exquisite youth and beauty.  lying on the floor was a dead man, in
evening dress, with a knife in his heart.  he was withered, wrinkled,
and loathsome of visage.  it was not till they had examined the rings
that they recognized who it was.
